
				Pages for logged out editors 

			
 is a 
 of 
 plesiosaur from the 
 of England, known from the 
. Its sole 
 was originally named 
 by 
 in 1869 before 
 gave it its own genus in 1889. It is known from many specimens, some very complete. It had a total length of 3.5 to 4 metres (11 to 13 ft), and a large, triangular skull elongated into a narrow 
 with conical teeth. The two sides of its 
 (lower jaw) were fused into a long 
 at the front. Its neck was short for a 
 and its limbs were modified into flippers, with the back pair larger than the front. 
 is classified in 
 with other short-necked pliosaurids. It was well-adapted to aquatic life, using its flippers for swimming, and its skull was reinforced against the stresses of feeding. 
 long, narrow snout could have been swung through the water to catch fish with its sharp teeth. (
)



The 
 is a hotel in 
, built in the Elizabethan 
 architectural style. Opened in 1922, it was purchased in 1960 by Helen Barnum, the matriarch of a successful timber family in the county, before being sold to John Biord after Barnum's death in 1993. In 2004, the inn was closed after tax defaults by its owner, reopening in 2010 after the businessman Libo Zhu purchased and refurbished it. In February 1982, the structure was listed on the 
. This photograph shows the Eureka Inn's entrance hall as seen in 2020.

Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the 
, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer 
:

This Wikipedia is written in 
. Many 
; some of the largest are listed below.

 (
 
) is a 
 
 
 written in Python and developed in Cambuslang. Originally designed for 
, it can also be used to extract data using 
 or as a general-purpose web crawler.
  It is currently maintained by 
 (formerly 
), a web-scraping development and services company.

Scrapy project architecture is built around "spiders", which are self-contained crawlers that are given a set of instructions. Following the spirit of other 
 frameworks, such as 
,
 it makes it easier to build and scale large crawling projects by allowing developers to reuse their code.

The Scrapy framework provides you with powerful features such as auto-throttle, rotating proxies and user-agents, allowing you scrape virtually undetected across the net. Scrapy also provides a web-crawling 
, which can be used by developers to test their assumptions on a site’s behavior.


Some well-known companies and products using Scrapy are: Lyst,
 
,
 
,
 
 Medialab,
 
’s World Government Data site.


Scrapy was born at London-based web-aggregation and e-commerce company Mydeco, where it was developed and maintained by employees of Mydeco and Insophia (a web-consulting company based in 
, Uruguay). The first public release was in August 2008 under the 
, with a milestone 1.0 release happening in June 2015.
 In 2011, Zyte (formerly Scrapinghub) became the new official maintainer.


In 
, a 
 is a 
 for building 
 in a wide variety of application 
. Conversely, a 
 is used within a specific area. For example, 
 was specifically designed for 
.

Early programming languages were designed either for scientific computing (numerical calculations) or commercial data processing, as was computer hardware. Scientific languages such as 
 and 
 supported floating-point calculations and multidimensional arrays, while business languages such as 
 supported fixed-field file formats and 
. Much less widely used were specialized languages such as 
 and 
 for 
; 
 for string manipulation; 
 for 
. 
 requiring 
 was typically done in 
, though 
 was used for some military applications.


's 
, announced in 1964, was designed as a unified hardware architecture supporting both scientific and commercial applications, and IBM developed 
 for it as a single, general-purpose language that supported scientific, commercial, and systems programming. Indeed, a subset of PL/I was used as the standard systems programming language for the 
 operating system.

Since PL/I, the distinction between scientific and commercial programming languages has diminished, with most languages supporting the basic features required by both, and much of the special file format handling delegated to specialized 
.

Many specialized languages were also developed starting in the 1960s: 
 and 
 for discrete event simulation; 
, 
, 
, and 
 for teaching programming; 
 for systems programming; 
 and 
 for interactive programming.


The distinction between general-purpose programming languages and domain-specific programming languages is not always clear.
 A programming language may be created for a specific task, but used beyond that original domain and thus be considered a general purpose programming language.  For example, 
, 
, and 
 were created as DSLs (for business processing, numeric computation, and symbolic processing), but became GPL’s over time.
 Inversely, a language may be designed for general use but only applied in a specific area in practice.
 A programming language that is well suited for a problem, whether it be general-purpose language or DSL, should minimize the level of detail required while still being expressive enough in the problem domain.
 As the name suggests, general-purpose language is “general” in that it cannot provide support for domain-specific notation while DSLs can be designed in diverse problem domains to handle this problem.
 General-purpose languages are preferred to DSLs when an application domain is not well understood enough to warrant its own language. In this case, a general-purpose language with an appropriate library of data types and functions for the domain may be used instead.
 While DSLs are usually smaller than GPL in that they offer a smaller range of notations of abstractions, some DSLs actually contain an entire GPL as a sublanguage. In these instances, the DSLs are able to offer domain-specific expressive power along with the expressive power of GPL.


General Purpose programming languages are all 
, meaning that they can theoretically solve any computational problem. Domain-specific languages are often similarly Turing complete but are not exclusively so.

General-purpose programming languages are more commonly used by programmers.  According to a study, 
, 
, and 
 were the most commonly used programming languages in 2021.
 One argument in favor of using general-purpose programming languages over domain-specific languages is that more people will be familiar with these languages, overcoming the need to learn a new language.

Additionally, for many tasks (e.g., statistical analysis, machine learning, etc.) there are libraries that are extensively tested and optimized. Theoretically, the presence of these libraries should bridge the gap between general-purpose and domain-specific languages.


An empirical study in 2010 sought to measure problem-solving and productivity between GPLs and CSLs by giving users problems who were familiar with the GPL (
) and unfamiliar with the DSL (
).  Ultimately, users of this specific domain-specific language performed better by a factor of 15%, even though they were more familiar with GPL, warranting further research.


The predecessor to 
, 
, was developed largely for a specific purpose: 
.
 By contrast, C has found use in a variety of computational domains, such as 
, 
, 
, and 
.

C is suitable for use in a variety of areas because of its generality. It provides economy of expression, flow control, data structures, and a rich set of operators, but does not constrain its users to use it in any one context.
 As a result, though it was first used by its creators to rewrite the kernel of the 
 operating system,
 it was easily adapted for use in application development, embedded systems (e.g., microprocessor programming), video games (e.g., 
), and so on. Today, C remains one of the most popular and widely-used programming languages.


Conceived as an extension to 
, 
 introduced 
 features, as well as other conveniences like references, operator overloading, and default arguments. Like 
, 
 generality allowed it to be used in a wide range of areas. While its 
’s core area of application is in systems programming (because of 
’s ability to grant access to low-level architecture),
 it has been used extensively to build desktop applications, video games, databases, financial systems, and much more.
 Major software and finance companies, such as 
, 
, 
, and 
, still widely use C++ in their internal and external applications.


 was conceived as a language that emphasized code readability and extensibility.
 The former allowed non-software engineers to easily learn and write computer programs, while the latter allowed domain specialists to easily create libraries suited to their own use cases. For these reasons, Python has been used across a wide range of domains.

Below are some of the areas where Python is used:


The following are some general-purpose programming languages:



 is the process of conceiving, specifying, designing, 
, 
, 
, and 
 involved in creating and maintaining 
, 
, or other software components. 
 development involves writing and 
 the 
, but in a broader sense, it includes all processes from the conception of the desired software through to the final manifestation of the software, typically in a planned and 
 process.
 Software development also includes research, new development, prototyping, modification, reuse, re-engineering, maintenance, or any other activities that result in software products.


One system development methodology is not necessarily suitable for use by all projects.

Each of the available methodologies are best suited to specific kinds of projects, based on various technical, organizational, project, and team considerations.


The sources of ideas for software products are plentiful. These ideas can come from 
 including the 
 of potential new customers, existing customers, sales prospects who rejected the product, other internal software development staff, or a creative third party. Ideas for software products are usually first evaluated by 
 personnel for economic feasibility, for fit with existing channels distribution, for possible effects on existing product lines, required 
, and for fit with the company's marketing objectives. In a marketing evaluation phase, the cost and time assumptions become evaluated. A decision is reached early in the first phase as to whether, based on the more detailed information generated by the marketing and development staff, the project should be pursued further.


In the book 
, 
 states in the chapter 
, sub-chapter 


Students of engineering learn engineering and are rarely exposed to finance or marketing. Students of marketing learn marketing and are rarely exposed to finance or engineering. Most of us become specialists in just one area. To complicate matters, few of us meet interdisciplinary people in the workforce, so there are few roles to mimic. Yet, software product planning is critical to the development success and absolutely requires knowledge of multiple disciplines.
An important task in creating software is 
. Customers typically have an abstract idea of what they want as an end result but do not know what 
 should do. Skilled and experienced software engineers recognize incomplete, ambiguous, or even contradictory requirements at this point.  Frequently demonstrating live code may help reduce the risk that the requirements are incorrect.

"Although much effort is put in the requirements phase to ensure that requirements are complete and consistent, rarely that is the case; leaving the software design phase as the most influential one when it comes to minimizing the effects of new or changing requirements. Requirements volatility is challenging because they impact future or already going development efforts."


A software developer is a person or company engaged in 
, including research, design, 
, testing, and other facets of creating 
. Other job titles for individuals with similar meanings include 
, 
, or 
. Companies specializing in software may be called software houses. In a large company, there may be employees whose sole responsibility consists of only one of the disciplines. In smaller development environments, a few people or even a single individual might handle the complete process. Collaborative environments, such as 
, can bring together many developers.

A 
 is a framework that provides the 
 on the 
 and its 
, to be used in the 
. It is a graphical representation of the underlying semantics of a view.

The purpose of viewpoints and views is to enable human engineers to comprehend very 
 and to organize the elements of the problem around domains of 
. In the 
 of physically intensive systems, viewpoints often correspond to capabilities and responsibilities within the engineering organization.


 of the current state of information provides a very effective means for presenting information to both users and system 
.

Usually, a model is created after conducting an interview, referred to as 
. The interview consists of a facilitator asking a series of questions designed to extract required information that describes a process. The interviewer is called a facilitator to emphasize that it is the participants who provide the information. The facilitator should have some knowledge of the process of interest, but this is not as important as having a structured methodology by which the questions are asked of the process expert. The methodology is
important because usually a team of facilitators is collecting information across the facility and the results of the information from all the interviewers must fit together once completed.


The models are developed as defining either the current state of the process, in which case the final product is called the "as-is" snapshot model, or a collection of ideas of what the process should contain, resulting in a "what-can-be" model. Generation of process and data models can be used to determine if the existing processes and information systems are sound and only need minor modifications or enhancements, or if re-engineering is required as a corrective action. The creation of business models is more than a way to view or automate your information process. Analysis can be used to fundamentally reshape the way your business or organization conducts its operations.


 (CASE), in the field 
, is the scientific application of a set of software tools and methods to the development of 
 which results in high-quality, defect-free, and maintainable software products.
 It also refers to methods for the development of 
 together with automated tools that can be used in the software development process.
 The term "computer-aided software engineering" (CASE) can refer to the 
 used for the automated development of 
, i.e., computer code. The CASE functions include analysis, design, and programming. CASE tools automate methods for designing, documenting, and producing structured computer code in the desired 
.


Two key ideas of Computer-aided Software System Engineering (CASE) are:


Typical CASE tools exist for 
, 
, 
, 
, 
.

A 
 is any 
 that can be used to express 
 or 
 or 
 in a 
 that is defined by a consistent set of rules. The rules are used for interpretation of the meaning of components in the structure. A modeling language can be graphical or textual.


A 
 is a fundamental style of 
, which is not generally dictated by the project management methodology (such as waterfall or agile). Paradigms differ in the concepts and abstractions used to represent the elements of a program (such as objects, functions, variables, constraints) and the steps that comprise a computation (such as assignations, evaluation, continuations, data flows).  Sometimes the concepts asserted by the paradigm are utilized cooperatively in high-level system architecture design; in other cases, the programming paradigm's scope is limited to the internal structure of a particular program or module. Example: 
's 
 (OOD), also known as object-oriented analysis and design (OOAD). The Booch model includes six diagrams: class, object, state transition, interaction, module, and process.


 Media related to 
 at Wikimedia Commons


 



 is a set of 
 and associated 
 and 
.
 This is in contrast to 
, from which the system is built and which actually performs the work.

At the 
, 
 consists of 
 instructions supported by an individual 
—typically a 
 (CPU) or a 
 (GPU). Machine language consists of groups of 
 signifying 
 that change the state of the computer from its preceding state. For example, an instruction may change the value stored in a particular storage location in the computer—an effect that is not directly observable to the user. An instruction 
 one of many 
, for example displaying some text on a computer screen; causing state changes which should be visible to the 
. The processor 
 the instructions in the order they are provided, unless it is instructed to 
, or is 
 by the operating system. As of 2023
, most 
, 
 devices and 
 have 
 or 
 together, so computing has become a much more 
 activity than in the past.

The majority of software is written in 
. They are easier and more efficient for programmers because they are closer to 
 than machine languages.
 High-level languages are translated into machine language using a 
 or an 
 or a combination of the two. Software may also be written in a low-level 
, which has a strong correspondence to the computer's machine language instructions and is translated into machine language using an assembler.

An 
 for what would have been the first piece of software was written by 
 in the 19th century, for the planned 
.
 She created 
 to show how the engine would calculate 
.
 Because of the proofs and the algorithm, she is considered the first computer programmer.


The first theory about software, prior to the creation of computers as we know them today, was proposed by 
 in his 1936 essay, 
 (decision problem).
 This eventually led to the creation of the academic fields of computer science and software engineering; both fields study software and its creation.
 Computer science is the theoretical study of computer and software (Turing's essay is an example of computer science), whereas software engineering is the application of engineering principles to development of software.


In 2000, Fred Shapiro, a librarian at the Yale Law School, published a letter revealing that 
's 1958 paper "The Teaching of Concrete Mathematics"
 contained the earliest known usage of the term "software" found in a search of 
's electronic archives, predating the 
's citation by two years.
 This led many to credit Tukey with coining the term, particularly in obituaries published that same year,
 although Tukey never claimed credit for any such coinage. In 1995, Paul Niquette claimed he had originally coined the term in October 1953, although he could not find any documents supporting his claim.
 The earliest known publication of the term "software" in an engineering context was in August 1953 by Richard R. Carhart, in a 
 Research Memorandum.


On virtually all computer platforms, software can be grouped into a few broad categories.

Based on the goal, computer software can be divided into:

Programming tools are also software in the form of programs or applications that 
 use to create, 
, 
, or otherwise 
 software.


Software is written in one or more programming languages; there are many 
 in existence, and each has at least one implementation, each of which consists of its own set of programming tools. These tools may be relatively self-contained programs such as 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
, that can be combined to accomplish a task; or they may form an 
 (IDE), which combines much or all of the functionality of such self-contained tools.
 IDEs may do this by either invoking the relevant individual tools or by re-implementing their functionality in a new way.
 An IDE can make it easier to do specific tasks, such as searching in files in a particular project.
 Many programming language implementations provide the option of using both individual tools or an IDE.


People who use modern general purpose computers (as opposed to 
, 
 and 
) usually see three layers of software performing a variety of tasks: platform, application, and user software.


Computer software has to be "loaded" into the computer's 
 (such as the 
 or 
). Once the software has loaded, the computer is able to 
 the software. This involves passing instructions from the application software, through the system software, to the hardware which ultimately receives the instruction as machine code. Each instruction causes the computer to carry out an operation—moving data, carrying out a 
, or altering the 
 of instructions.


Data movement is typically from one place in memory to another. Sometimes it involves moving data between memory and registers which enable high-speed data access in the CPU. Moving data, especially large amounts of it, can be costly; this is sometimes avoided by using "pointers" to data instead.
 Computations include simple operations such as incrementing the value of a variable data element. More complex computations may involve many operations and data elements together.


Software quality is very important, especially for 
 and system software. If software is faulty, it can delete a person's work, crash the computer and do other unexpected things. Faults and errors are called "
" which are often discovered during alpha and beta testing.
 Software is often also a victim to what is known as 
, the progressive performance degradation resulting from a combination of unseen bugs.


Many bugs are discovered and fixed through 
. However, software testing rarely—if ever—eliminates every bug; some programmers say that "every program has at least one more bug" (Lubarsky's Law).
 In the 
 method of software development, separate testing teams are typically employed, but in newer approaches, collectively termed 
, developers often do all their own testing, and demonstrate the software to users/clients regularly to obtain feedback.
 Software can be tested through 
, 
 and other methods, which are done manually, or most commonly, automatically, since the amount of code to be tested can be large.
 Programs containing command software enable hardware engineering and system operations to function much easier together.


The software's license gives the user the right to use the software in the licensed environment, and in the case of 
, also grants other rights such as the right to make copies.


 can be divided into two types:

 comes with a free software license, granting the recipient the rights to modify and redistribute the software.


Software patents, like other types of 
, are theoretically supposed to give an inventor an exclusive, time-limited license for a 
 a piece of software, or a component of a piece of software. Ideas for useful things that software could 
, and user 
, are not supposed to be patentable, and concrete implementations (i.e. the actual software packages implementing the patent) are not supposed to be patentable either—the latter are already covered by copyright, generally automatically. So software patents are supposed to cover the middle area, between requirements and concrete implementation. In some countries, a requirement for the claimed invention to have an effect on the physical world may also be part of the requirements for a software patent to be held valid—although since 
 useful software has effects on the physical world, this requirement may be open to debate. Meanwhile, American copyright law was applied to various aspects of the writing of the software code.


Software patents are controversial in the software industry with many people holding different views about them. One of the sources of controversy is that the aforementioned split between initial ideas and patent does not seem to be honored in practice by patent lawyers—for example the patent for 
 (AOP), which purported to claim rights over 
 programming tool implementing the idea of AOP, howsoever implemented.
 Another source of controversy is the effect on innovation, with many distinguished experts and companies arguing that software is such a fast-moving field that software patents merely create vast additional litigation costs and risks, and actually retard innovation.
 In the case of debates about software patents outside the United States, the argument has been made that large American corporations and patent lawyers are likely to be the primary beneficiaries of allowing or continue to allow software patents.


Design and implementation of software vary depending on the complexity of the software. For instance, the design and creation of 
 took much more time than designing and developing 
 because the former has much more basic functionality.


Software is usually developed in 
 (IDE) like 
, 
 and 
 that can simplify the process and 
 the software.
 As noted in a different section, software is usually created on top of existing software and the 
 (API) that the underlying software provides like 
, JavaBeans or 
.
 Libraries (APIs) can be categorized by their purpose. For instance, the 
 is used for implementing 
, the 
 library is used for designing graphical user interface (GUI) applications like Microsoft Word, and 
 is used for designing 
.
 When a program is designed, it relies upon the API. For instance, a Microsoft Windows desktop application might call API functions in the 
 Windows Forms library like 
 and 
 to close or open the application. Without these APIs, the programmer needs to write these functionalities entirely themselves. Companies like 
 and 
 provide their own APIs so that many applications are written using their 
 that usually have numerous APIs in them.


 such as 
, 
, and 
, and 
 such as 
, can be useful for creating software.

Computer software has special economic characteristics that make its design, creation, and distribution different from most other economic goods.


A person who creates software is called a 
, 
 or software developer, terms that all have a similar meaning. More informal terms for programmer also exist such as "coder" and "hacker" – although use of the latter word may cause confusion, because it is more often used to mean 
.



, 
, or 
 is 
 used for 
 from 
.
 Web scraping software may directly access the 
 using the 
 or a web browser. While web scraping can be done manually by a software user, the term typically refers to automated processes implemented using a 
 or 
. It is a form of copying in which specific data is gathered and copied from the web, typically into a central local 
 or spreadsheet, for later 
 or 
.

Scraping a web page involves fetching it and extracting from it. Fetching is the downloading of a page (which a browser does when a user views a page). Therefore, web crawling is a main component of web scraping, to fetch pages for later processing. Once fetched, extraction can take place. The content of a page may be 
, searched and reformatted, and its data copied into a spreadsheet or loaded into a database. Web scrapers typically take something out of a page, to make use of it for another purpose somewhere else. An example would be finding and copying names and telephone numbers, companies and their URLs, or e-mail addresses to a list (contact scraping).

As well as 
, web scraping is used as a component of applications used for 
, 
 and 
, online price change monitoring and 
, product review scraping (to watch the competition), gathering real estate listings, weather data monitoring, 
, research, tracking online presence and reputation, 
, and 
.

 are built using text-based mark-up languages (
 and 
), and frequently contain a wealth of useful data in text form. However, most web pages are designed for human 
 and not for ease of automated use. As a result, specialized tools and software have been developed to facilitate the scraping of web pages.

Newer forms of web scraping involve monitoring data feeds from web servers.  For example, 
 is commonly used as a transport storage mechanism between the client and the web server.

There are methods that some websites use to prevent web scraping, such as detecting and disallowing bots from crawling (viewing) their pages. In response, there are web scraping systems that rely on using techniques in 
 parsing, 
 and 
 to simulate human browsing to enable gathering web page content for offline parsing.

The history of web scraping dates back nearly to the time when the World Wide Web was born.

Web scraping is the process of automatically mining data or collecting information from the World Wide Web. It is a field with active developments sharing a common goal with the 
 vision, an ambitious initiative that still requires breakthroughs in text processing, semantic understanding, artificial intelligence and 
.

The simplest form of web scraping is manually copying and pasting data from a web page into a text file or spreadsheet. Sometimes even the best web-scraping technology cannot replace a human's manual examination and copy-and-paste, and sometimes this may be the only workable solution when the websites for scraping explicitly set up barriers to prevent machine automation.

A simple yet powerful approach to extract information from web pages can be based on the UNIX 
 command or 
-matching facilities of programming languages (for instance 
 or 
).

 and 
 can be retrieved by posting HTTP requests to the remote web server using 
.

Many websites have large collections of pages generated dynamically from an underlying structured source like a database. Data of the same category are typically encoded into similar pages by a common script or template. In data mining, a program that detects such templates in a particular information source, extracts its content and translates it into a relational form, is called a 
. Wrapper generation algorithms assume that input pages of a wrapper induction system conform to a common template and that they can be easily identified in terms of a URL common scheme.
 Moreover, some 
 query languages, such as 
 and the HTQL, can be used to parse HTML pages and to retrieve and transform page content.

By embedding a full-fledged web browser, such as the 
 or the 
 browser control, programs can retrieve the dynamic content generated by client-side scripts. These browser controls also parse web pages into a DOM tree, based on which programs can retrieve parts of the pages. Languages such as 
 can be used to parse the resulting DOM tree.

There are several companies that have developed vertical specific harvesting platforms. These platforms create and monitor a multitude of "bots" for specific verticals with no "man in the loop" (no direct human involvement), and no work related to a specific target site. The preparation involves establishing the knowledge base for the entire vertical and then the platform creates the bots automatically. The platform's robustness is measured by the quality of the information it retrieves (usually number of fields) and its scalability (how quick it can scale up to hundreds or thousands of sites). This scalability is mostly used to target the 
 of sites that common aggregators find complicated or too labor-intensive to harvest content from.

The pages being scraped may embrace 
 or semantic markups and annotations, which can be used to locate specific data snippets. If the annotations are embedded in the pages, as 
 does, this technique can be viewed as a special case of DOM parsing. In another case, the annotations, organized into a semantic layer,
 are stored and managed separately from the web pages, so the scrapers can retrieve data schema and instructions from this layer before scraping the pages.

There are efforts using 
 and 
 that attempt to identify and extract information from web pages by interpreting pages visually as a human being might.


There are many software tools available that can be used to customize web-scraping solutions. This software may attempt to automatically recognize the data structure of a page or provide a recording interface that removes the necessity to manually write web-scraping code, or some scripting functions that can be used to extract and transform content, and database interfaces that can store the scraped data in local databases. Some web scraping software can also be used to extract data from an API directly.

The legality of web scraping varies across the world. In general, web scraping may be against the 
 of some websites, but the enforceability of these terms is unclear.


In the United States, website owners can use three major 
 to prevent undesired web scraping: (1) copyright infringement (compilation), (2) violation of the 
 ("CFAA"), and (3) 
.
 However, the effectiveness of these claims relies upon meeting various criteria, and the case law is still evolving. For example, with regard to copyright, while outright duplication of original expression will in many cases be illegal, in the United States the courts ruled in 
 that duplication of facts is allowable.

U.S. courts have acknowledged that users of "scrapers" or "robots" may be held liable for committing 
,
 which involves a computer system itself being considered personal property upon which the user of a scraper is trespassing. The best known of these cases, 
, resulted in an injunction ordering Bidder's Edge to stop accessing, collecting, and indexing auctions from the eBay web site. This case involved automatic placing of bids, known as 
. However, in order to succeed on a claim of trespass to 
, the 
 must demonstrate that the 
 intentionally and without authorization interfered with the plaintiff's possessory interest in the computer system and that the defendant's unauthorized use caused damage to the plaintiff. Not all cases of web spidering brought before the courts have been considered trespass to chattels.


One of the first major tests of 
 involved 
 (AA), and a firm called FareChase.
 AA successfully obtained an 
 from a Texas trial court, stopping FareChase from selling software that enables users to compare online fares if the software also searches AA's website. The airline argued that FareChase's websearch software trespassed on AA's servers when it collected the publicly available data. FareChase filed an appeal in March 2003. By June, FareChase and AA agreed to settle and the appeal was dropped.


 has also challenged screen-scraping practices, and has involved both FareChase and another firm, Outtask, in a legal claim. Southwest Airlines charged that the screen-scraping is Illegal since it is an example of "Computer Fraud and Abuse" and has led to "Damage and Loss" and "Unauthorized Access" of Southwest's site. It also constitutes "Interference with Business Relations", "Trespass", and "Harmful Access by Computer". They also claimed that screen-scraping constitutes what is legally known as "Misappropriation and Unjust Enrichment", as well as being a breach of the web site's user agreement. Outtask denied all these claims, claiming that the prevailing law, in this case, should be 
 and that under copyright, the pieces of information being scraped would not be subject to copyright protection. Although the cases were never resolved in the 
, FareChase was eventually shuttered by parent company 
, and Outtask was purchased by travel expense company Concur.

In 2012, a startup called 3Taps scraped classified housing ads from Craigslist. Craigslist sent 3Taps a cease-and-desist letter and blocked their IP addresses and later sued, in 
. The court held that the cease-and-desist letter and IP blocking was sufficient for Craigslist to properly claim that 3Taps had violated the 
.

Although these are early scraping decisions, and the theories of liability are not uniform, it is difficult to ignore a pattern emerging that the courts are prepared to protect proprietary content on commercial sites from uses which are undesirable to the owners of such sites. However, the degree of protection for such content is not settled and will depend on the type of access made by the scraper, the amount of information accessed and copied, the degree to which the access adversely affects the site owner's system and the types and manner of prohibitions on such conduct.


While the law in this area becomes more settled, entities contemplating using scraping programs to access a public web site should also consider whether such action is authorized by reviewing the terms of use and other terms or notices posted on or made available through the site. In a 2010 ruling in the 
 In the United States district court for the eastern district of Virginia, the court ruled that the terms of use should be brought to the users' attention In order for a 
 contract or license to be enforced.
 In a 2014 case, filed in the 
,
 e-commerce site 
 objected to the Pinterest-like shopping aggregator Resultly's 'scraping of QVC's site for real-time pricing data. QVC alleges that Resultly "excessively crawled" QVC's retail site (allegedly sending 200-300 search requests to QVC's website per minute, sometimes to up to 36,000 requests per minute) which caused QVC's site to crash for two days, resulting in lost sales for QVC.
 QVC's complaint alleges that the defendant disguised its web crawler to mask its source IP address and thus prevented QVC from quickly repairing the problem. This is a particularly interesting scraping case because QVC is seeking damages for the unavailability of their website, which QVC claims was caused by Resultly.

In the plaintiff's web site during the period of this trial, the terms of use link are displayed among all the links of the site, at the bottom of the page as most sites on the internet. This ruling contradicts the Irish ruling described below. The court also rejected the plaintiff's argument that the browse-wrap restrictions were enforceable in view of Virginia's adoption of the Uniform Computer Information Transactions Act (UCITA)—a uniform law that many believed was in favor on common browse-wrap contracting practices.


In 
, a district court ruled in 2012 that Power Ventures could not scrape Facebook pages on behalf of a Facebook user. The case is on appeal, and the 
 filed a brief in 2015 asking that it be overturned.
 In 
, a court in the US held Meltwater liable for scraping and republishing news information from the Associated Press, but a court in the United Kingdom held in favor of Meltwater.

 collects and distributes a significant number of publicly available web pages without being considered to be in violation of copyright laws.

In February 2006, the 
 (Copenhagen) ruled that systematic crawling, indexing, and deep linking by portal site ofir.dk of estate site Home.dk does not conflict with Danish law or the database directive of the European Union.


In a February 2010 case complicated by matters of jurisdiction, Ireland's High Court delivered a verdict that illustrates the 
 state of developing case law. In the case of 
, Ireland's High Court ruled 
 "
" agreement to be legally binding. In contrast to the findings of the United States District Court Eastern District of Virginia and those of the Danish Maritime and Commercial Court, Justice 
 ruled that the hyperlink to Ryanair's terms and conditions was plainly visible, and that placing the onus on the user to agree to terms and conditions in order to gain access to online services is sufficient to comprise a contractual relationship.
 The decision is under appeal in Ireland's Supreme Court.


On April 30, 2020, the French Data Protection Authority (CNIL) released new guidelines on web scraping.
 The CNIL guidelines made it clear that publicly available data is still personal data and cannot be repurposed without the knowledge of the person to whom that data belongs.


In Australia, the 
 outlaws some forms of web harvesting, although this only applies to email addresses.


Leaving a few cases dealing with IPR infringement, Indian courts have not expressly ruled on the legality of web scraping. However, since all common forms of electronic contracts are enforceable in India, violating the terms of use prohibiting data scraping will be a violation of the contract law. It will also violate the 
, which penalizes unauthorized access to a computer resource or extracting data from a computer resource.

The administrator of a website can use various measures to stop or slow a bot. Some techniques include:




A 
 is a system of notation for writing 
.
 Most programming languages are text-based 
, but they may also be 
. They are a kind of 
.

The description of a programming language is usually split into the two components of 
 (form) and 
 (meaning), which are usually defined by a 
. Some languages are defined by a specification document (for example, the 
 programming language is specified by an 
 Standard) while other languages (such as 
) have a dominant 
 that is treated as a 
. Some languages have both, with the basic language defined by a standard and extensions taken from the dominant implementation being common. 

 is the subfield of 
 that studies the design, implementation, analysis, characterization, and classification of programming languages.

There are many considerations when defining what constitutes a programming language.

The term 
 is sometimes used interchangeably with programming language.
 However, the usage of both terms varies among authors, including the exact scope of each. One usage describes programming languages as a subset of computer languages.
 Similarly, languages used in computing that have a different goal than expressing computer programs are generically designated computer languages. For instance, markup languages are sometimes referred to as computer languages to emphasize that they are not meant to be used for programming.

One way of classifying computer languages is by the computations they are capable of expressing, as described by the 
. The majority of practical programming languages are 
,
 and all Turing complete languages can implement the same set of 
. 
 and Charity are examples of languages that are not Turing complete, yet are often called programming languages.
 However, some authors restrict the term "programming language" to Turing complete languages.


Another usage regards programming languages as theoretical constructs for programming 
 and computer languages as the subset thereof that runs on physical computers, which have finite hardware resources.
 
 emphasizes that 
 languages are just as much programming languages as are the languages intended for execution. He also argues that textual and even graphical input formats that affect the behavior of a computer are programming languages, despite the fact they are commonly not Turing-complete, and remarks that ignorance of programming language concepts is the reason for many flaws in input formats.


In most practical contexts, a programming language involves a computer; consequently, programming languages are usually defined and studied this way.
 Programming languages differ from 
 in that natural languages are only used for interaction between people, while programming languages also allow humans to communicate instructions to machines.

The domain of the language is also worth consideration. 
 like 
, 
, or 
, which define 
, are not usually considered programming languages.
 Programming languages may, however, share the syntax with markup languages if a computational semantics is defined. 
, for example, is a Turing complete language entirely using XML syntax.
 Moreover, 
, which is mostly used for structuring documents, also contains a Turing complete subset.


Programming languages usually contain 
 for defining and manipulating 
 or controlling the 
. The practical necessity that a programming language support adequate abstractions is expressed by the 
.
 This principle is sometimes formulated as a recommendation to the programmer to make proper use of such abstractions.


Very early computers, such as 
, were programmed without the help of a 
, by modifying their circuitry or setting banks of physical controls.

Slightly later, programs could be written in 
, where the programmer writes each instruction in a numeric form the hardware can execute directly. For example, the instruction to add the value in two memory locations might consist of 3 numbers: an "opcode" that selects the "add" operation, and two memory locations. The programs, in decimal or binary form, were read in from 
, paper tape, 
 or toggled in on switches on the 
 of the computer.  Machine languages were later termed 
 (1GL).

The next step was the development of the so-called 
 (2GL) or 
, which were still closely tied to the 
 of the specific computer. These served to make the program much more human-readable and relieved the programmer of tedious and error-prone address calculations.

The first 
, or 
 (3GL), were written in the 1950s. An early high-level programming language to be designed for a computer was 
, developed for the German 
 by 
 between 1943 and 1945. However, it was not implemented until 1998 and 2000.


's 
, proposed in 1949, was one of the first high-level languages ever developed for an 
.
 Unlike 
, Short Code statements represented mathematical expressions in an understandable form. However, the program had to be translated into machine code every time it ran, making the process much slower than running the equivalent machine code.

At the 
, 
 developed 
 in the early 1950s. As a 
, it used a 
 to automatically convert the language into machine code. The first code and compiler was developed in 1952 for the 
 computer at the University of Manchester and is considered to be the first 
 high-level programming language.


The second auto code was developed for the Mark 1 by 
 in 1954 and was called the "Mark 1 Autocode". Brooker also developed an auto code for the 
 in the 1950s in conjunction with the University of Manchester. The version for the 
 was devised by 
 of 
 in 1961. Known as EDSAC 2 Autocode, it was a straight development from Mercury Autocode adapted for local circumstances and was noted for its object code optimization and source-language diagnostics which were advanced for the time. A contemporary but separate thread of development, 
 was developed for the University of Manchester 
 machine.

In 1954, 
 was invented at IBM by 
. It was the first widely used 
 to have a functional implementation, as opposed to just a design on paper.
 It is still a popular language for 
 and is used for programs that benchmark and rank the world's 
.


Another early programming language was devised by 
 in the US, called 
. It was developed for the 
 at 
 during the period from 1955 until 1959. Hopper found that business data processing customers were uncomfortable with mathematical notation, and in early 1955, she and her team wrote a specification for an 
 programming language and implemented a prototype.
 The FLOW-MATIC compiler became publicly available in early 1958 and was substantially complete in 1959.
 FLOW-MATIC was a major influence in the design of 
, since only it and its direct descendant 
 were in actual use at the time.


The increased use of high-level languages introduced a requirement for 
 or 
. These languages, to varying degrees, provide facilities between assembly languages and high-level languages. They can be used to perform tasks that require direct access to hardware facilities but still provide higher-level control structures and error-checking.

The period from the 1960s to the late 1970s brought the development of the major language paradigms now in use:

Each of these languages spawned descendants, and most modern programming languages count at least one of them in their ancestry.

The 1960s and 1970s also saw considerable debate over the merits of 
, and whether programming languages should be designed to support it.
 
, in a famous 1968 letter published in the 
, argued that 
 statements should be eliminated from all "higher level" programming languages.


The 1980s were years of relative consolidation. 
 combined object-oriented and systems programming. The United States government standardized 
, a systems programming language derived from 
 and intended for use by defense contractors. In Japan and elsewhere, vast sums were spent investigating the so-called 
 that incorporated logic programming constructs.
 The functional languages community moved to standardize 
 and Lisp. Rather than inventing new paradigms, all of these movements elaborated upon the ideas invented in the previous decades.

One important trend in language design for programming large-scale systems during the 1980s was an increased focus on the use of 
 or large-scale organizational units of code. 
, Ada, and ML all developed notable module systems in the 1980s, which were often wedded to 
 constructs.


The rapid growth of the 
 in the mid-1990s created opportunities for new languages. 
, originally a Unix scripting tool first released in 1987, became common in dynamic 
. 
 came to be used for server-side programming, and bytecode virtual machines became popular again in commercial settings with their promise of "
" (
 had been popular for a time in the early 1980s). These developments were not fundamentally novel; rather, they were refinements of many existing languages and paradigms (although their syntax was often based on the C family of programming languages).

Programming language evolution continues, in both industry and research. Current directions include security and 
, new kinds of modularity (
, 
, 
), and database integration such as Microsoft's 
.

 (4GL) are computer programming languages that aim to provide a higher level of abstraction of the internal computer hardware details than 3GLs. 
 (5GL) are programming languages based on solving problems using constraints given to the program, rather than using an 
 written by a programmer.

All programming languages have some 
 building blocks for the description of data and the processes or transformations applied to them (like the addition of two numbers or the selection of an item from a collection). These primitives are defined by syntactic and semantic rules which describe their structure and meaning respectively.

A programming language's surface form is known as its 
. Most programming languages are purely textual; they use sequences of text including words, numbers, and punctuation, much like written natural languages. On the other hand, some programming languages are more 
 in nature, using visual relationships between symbols to specify a program.

The syntax of a language describes the possible combinations of symbols that form a syntactically correct program. The meaning given to a combination of symbols is handled by semantics (either 
 or hard-coded in a 
). Since most languages are textual, this article discusses textual syntax.

The programming language syntax is usually defined using a combination of 
 (for 
 structure) and 
 (for 
 structure). Below is a simple grammar, based on 
:

This grammar specifies the following:

The following are examples of well-formed token sequences in this grammar: 
, 
 and 
.

Not all syntactically correct programs are semantically correct. Many syntactically correct programs are nonetheless ill-formed, per the language's rules; and may (depending on the language specification and the soundness of the implementation) result in an error on translation or execution. In some cases, such programs may exhibit 
. Even when a program is well-defined within a language, it may still have a meaning that is not intended by the person who wrote it.

Using 
 as an example, it may not be possible to assign a meaning to a grammatically correct sentence or the sentence may be false:

The following 
 fragment is syntactically correct, but performs operations that are not semantically defined (the operation 
 has no meaning for a value having a complex type and 
 is not defined because the value of 
 is the 
):

If the 
 on the first line were omitted, the program would trigger an error on the undefined variable 
 during compilation. However, the program would still be syntactically correct since type declarations provide only semantic information.

The grammar needed to specify a programming language can be classified by its position in the 
. The syntax of most programming languages can be specified using a Type-2 grammar, i.e., they are 
.
 Some languages, including Perl and Lisp, contain constructs that allow execution during the parsing phase. Languages that have constructs that allow the programmer to alter the behavior of the parser make syntax analysis an 
, and generally blur the distinction between parsing and execution.
 In contrast to 
 and Perl's 
 blocks, which may contain general computations, C macros are merely string replacements and do not require code execution.


The term 
 refers to the meaning of languages, as opposed to their form (
).

A static semantics defines restrictions on the structure of valid texts that are hard or impossible to express in standard syntactic formalisms.
 For compiled languages, static semantics essentially include those semantic rules that can be checked at compile time. Examples include checking that every 
 is declared before it is used (in languages that require such declarations) or that the labels on the arms of a 
 are distinct.
 Many important restrictions of this type, like checking that identifiers are used in the appropriate context (e.g. not adding an integer to a function name), or that 
 calls have the appropriate number and type of arguments, can be enforced by defining them as rules in a 
 called a 
. Other forms of 
 like 
 may also be part of static semantics. Newer programming languages like 
 and 
 have 
, a form of data flow analysis, as part of their static semantics.

Once data has been specified, the machine must be instructed to perform operations on the data. For example, the semantics may define the 
 by which expressions are evaluated to values, or the manner in which 
 conditionally execute 
. The 
 (also known as 
) of a language defines how and when the various constructs of a language should produce a program behavior. There are many ways of defining execution semantics. Natural language is often used to specify the execution semantics of languages commonly used in practice. A significant amount of academic research went into 
, which allows execution semantics to be specified in a formal manner. Results from this field of research have seen limited application to programming language design and implementation outside academia.

A type system defines how a programming language classifies values and expressions into 
, how it can manipulate those types and how they interact. The goal of a type system is to verify and usually enforce a certain level of correctness in programs written in that language by detecting certain incorrect operations. Any 
 type system involves a trade-off: while it rejects many incorrect programs, it can also prohibit some correct, albeit unusual programs. In order to bypass this downside, a number of languages have 
, usually unchecked 
 that may be used by the programmer to explicitly allow a normally disallowed operation between different types. In most typed languages, the type system is used only to 
 programs, but a number of languages, usually functional ones, 
, relieving the programmer from the need to write type annotations. The formal design and study of type systems is known as 
.

A language is 
 if the specification of every operation defines types of data to which the operation is applicable.
 For example, the data represented by 
 is a 
, and in many programming languages dividing a number by a string has no meaning and will not be executed. The invalid operation may be detected when the program is compiled ("static" type checking) and will be rejected by the compiler with a compilation error message, or it may be detected while the program is running ("dynamic" type checking), resulting in a run-time 
. Many languages allow a function called an exception handler to handle this exception and, for example, always return "-1" as the result.

A special case of typed languages is the 
 languages. These are often scripting or markup languages, such as 
 or 
, and have only one data type
–—most commonly character strings which are used for both symbolic and numeric data.

In contrast, an 
, such as most 
, allows any operation to be performed on any data, generally sequences of bits of various lengths.
 High-level untyped languages include 
, 
, and some varieties of 
.

In practice, while few languages are considered typed from the 
 (verifying or rejecting all operations), most modern languages offer a degree of typing.
 Many production languages provide means to bypass or subvert the type system, trading type safety for finer control over the program's execution (see 
).

In 
, all expressions have their types determined prior to when the program is executed, typically at compile-time. For example, 1 and (2+2) are integer expressions; they cannot be passed to a function that expects a string or stored in a variable that is defined to hold dates.


Statically typed languages can be either 
 or 
. In the first case, the programmer must explicitly write types at certain textual positions (for example, at variable 
). In the second case, the compiler 
 the types of expressions and declarations based on context. Most mainstream statically typed languages, such as 
, 
 and 
, are manifestly typed. Complete type inference has traditionally been associated with functional languages such as 
 and 
.
 However, many manifestly typed languages support partial type inference; for example, 
, 
, and 
 all infer types in certain limited cases.
 Additionally, some programming languages allow for some types to be automatically converted to other types; for example, an int can be used where the program expects a float.

, also called 
, determines the type-safety of operations at run time; in other words, types are associated with 
 rather than 
.
 As with type-inferred languages, dynamically typed languages do not require the programmer to write explicit type annotations on expressions. Among other things, this may permit a single variable to refer to values of different types at different points in the program execution. However, type 
 cannot be automatically detected until a piece of code is actually executed, potentially making 
 more difficult. 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 are all examples of dynamically typed languages.

 allows a value of one type to be treated as another, for example treating a 
 as a number.
 This can occasionally be useful, but it can also allow some kinds of program faults to go undetected at 
 and even at 
.

 prevents these program faults. An attempt to perform an operation on the wrong type of value raises an error.
 Strongly typed languages are often termed 
 or 
.

An alternative definition for "weakly typed" refers to languages, such as 
 and 
, which permit a large number of implicit type conversions. In JavaScript, for example, the expression 
 implicitly converts 
 to a number, and this conversion succeeds even if 
 is 
, 
, an 
, or a string of letters. Such implicit conversions are often useful, but they can mask programming errors.

 and 
 are now generally considered orthogonal concepts, but usage in the literature differs. Some use the term 
 to mean 
, or, even more confusingly, to mean simply 
. Thus 
 has been called both strongly typed and weakly, statically typed.


It may seem odd to some professional programmers that C could be "weakly, statically typed". However, notice that the use of the generic pointer, the 
 pointer, does allow casting pointers to other pointers without needing to do an explicit cast. This is extremely similar to somehow casting an array of bytes to any kind of datatype in C without using an explicit cast, such as 
 or 
.

Most programming languages have an associated core 
 (sometimes known as the "standard library", especially if it is included as part of the published language standard), which is conventionally made available by all implementations of the language. Core libraries typically include definitions for commonly used algorithms, data structures, and mechanisms for input and output.

The line between a language and its core library differs from language to language. In some cases, the language designers may treat the library as a separate entity from the language. However, a language's core library is often treated as part of the language by its users, and some language specifications even require that this library be made available in all implementations. Indeed, some languages are designed so that the meanings of certain syntactic constructs cannot even be described without referring to the core library. For example, in 
, a string literal is defined as an instance of the 
 class; similarly, in 
, an 
 expression (a "block") constructs an instance of the library's 
 class. Conversely, 
 contains multiple coherent subsets that suffice to construct the rest of the language as library macros, and so the language designers do not even bother to say which portions of the language must be implemented as language constructs, and which must be implemented as parts of a library.

Programming languages share properties with natural languages related to their purpose as vehicles for communication, having a syntactic form separate from its semantics, and showing 
 of related languages branching one from another.
 But as artificial constructs, they also differ in fundamental ways from languages that have evolved through usage. A significant difference is that a programming language can be fully described and studied in its entirety since it has a precise and finite definition.
 By contrast, 
 have changing meanings given by their users in different communities. While 
 are also artificial languages designed from the ground up with a specific purpose, they lack the precise and complete semantic definition that a programming language has.

Many programming languages have been designed from scratch, altered to meet new needs, and combined with other languages. Many have eventually fallen into disuse. Although there have been attempts to design one "universal" programming language that serves all purposes, all of them have failed to be generally accepted as filling this role.
 The need for diverse programming languages arises from the diversity of contexts in which languages are used:

One common trend in the development of programming languages has been to add more ability to solve problems using a higher level of 
. The earliest programming languages were tied very closely to the underlying hardware of the computer. As new programming languages have developed, features have been added that let programmers express ideas that are more remote from simple translation into underlying hardware instructions. Because programmers are less tied to the complexity of the computer, their programs can do more computing with less effort from the programmer. This lets them write more functionality per time unit.




 has been proposed as a way to eliminate the need for a specialized language for programming. However, this goal remains distant and its benefits are open to debate. 
 took the position that the use of a formal language is essential to prevent the introduction of meaningless constructs, and dismissed 
 as "foolish".
 
 was similarly dismissive of the idea.
 Hybrid approaches have been taken in 
 and 
.

A language's designers and users must construct a number of artifacts that govern and enable the practice of programming. The most important of these artifacts are the language 
 and 
.

The specification of a programming language is an artifact that the language 
 and the 
 can use to agree upon whether a piece of 
 is a valid 
 in that language, and if so what its behavior shall be.

A programming language specification can take several forms, including the following:

An 
 of a programming language provides a way to write programs in that language and execute them on one or more configurations of hardware and software. There are, broadly, two approaches to programming language implementation: 
 and 
. It is generally possible to implement a language using either technique.

The output of a 
 may be executed by hardware or a program called an interpreter. In some implementations that make use of the interpreter approach, there is no distinct boundary between compiling and interpreting. For instance, some implementations of 
 compile and then execute the source one line at a time.

Programs that are executed directly on the hardware usually run much faster than those that are interpreted in software.


One technique for improving the performance of interpreted programs is 
. Here the 
, just before execution, translates the blocks of 
 which are going to be used to machine code, for direct execution on the hardware.

Although most of the most commonly used programming languages have fully open specifications and implementations, many programming languages exist only as proprietary programming languages with the implementation available only from a single vendor, which may claim that such a proprietary language is their intellectual property. Proprietary programming languages are commonly 
 or internal 
 for a single product; some proprietary languages are used only internally within a vendor, while others are available to external users.

Some programming languages exist on the border between proprietary and open; for example, 
 asserts proprietary rights to some aspects of the 
,
 and 
's 
 programming language, which has open implementations of most parts of the system, also has 
 (CLR) as a closed environment.


Many proprietary languages are widely used, in spite of their proprietary nature; examples include 
, 
, and 
.  Some languages may make the transition from closed to open; for example, 
 was originally Ericsson's internal programming language.


Thousands of different programming languages have been created, mainly in the computing field.

Individual software projects commonly use five programming languages or more.


Programming languages differ from most other forms of human expression in that they require a greater degree of precision and completeness. When using a natural language to communicate with other people, human authors and speakers can be ambiguous and make small errors, and still expect their intent to be understood. However, figuratively speaking, computers "do exactly what they are told to do", and cannot "understand" what code the programmer intended to write. The combination of the language definition, a program, and the program's inputs must fully specify the external behavior that occurs when the program is executed, within the domain of control of that program. On the other hand, ideas about an algorithm can be communicated to humans without the precision required for execution by using 
, which interleaves natural language with code written in a programming language.

A programming language provides a structured mechanism for defining pieces of data, and the operations or transformations that may be carried out automatically on that data. A 
 uses the 
 present in the language to represent the concepts involved in a computation. These concepts are represented as a collection of the simplest elements available (called 
).
 
 is the process by which programmers combine these primitives to compose new programs, or adapt existing ones to new uses or a changing environment.

Programs for a computer might be 
 in a 
 without human interaction, or a user might type 
 in an 
 of an 
. In this case the "commands" are simply programs, whose execution is chained together. When a language can run its commands through an interpreter (such as a 
 or other 
), without compiling, it is called a 
.


Determining which is the most widely used programming language is difficult since the definition of usage varies by context. One language may occupy the greater number of programmer hours, a different one has more lines of code, and a third may consume the most CPU time. Some languages are very popular for particular kinds of applications. For example, 
 is still strong in the corporate data center, often on large 
;
 
 in scientific and engineering applications; 
 in aerospace, transportation, military, real-time, and embedded applications; and 
 in embedded applications and operating systems. Other languages are regularly used to write many different kinds of applications.

Various methods of measuring language popularity, each subject to a different bias over what is measured, have been proposed:

Combining and averaging information from various internet sites, stackify.com reported the ten most popular programming languages (in descending order by overall popularity): 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


A 
 of a programming language or a 
 is a (relatively small) variation or extension of the language that does not change its intrinsic nature. With languages such as 
 and 
, standards may be considered insufficient, inadequate, or illegitimate by implementors, so often they will deviate from the standard, making a new 
. In other cases, a dialect is created for use in a 
, often a subset. In the 
 world, most languages that use basic 
 syntax and Lisp-like semantics are considered Lisp dialects, although they vary wildly, as do, say, 
 and 
. As it is common for one language to have several dialects, it can become quite difficult for an inexperienced programmer to find the right documentation. The 
 has 
.

There is no overarching classification scheme for programming languages. A given programming language does not usually have a single ancestor language. Languages commonly arise by combining the elements of several predecessor languages with new ideas in circulation at the time. Ideas that originate in one language will diffuse throughout a family of related languages, and then leap suddenly across familial gaps to appear in an entirely different family.

The task is further complicated by the fact that languages can be classified along multiple axes. For example, Java is both an object-oriented language (because it encourages object-oriented organization) and a concurrent language (because it contains built-in constructs for running multiple 
 in parallel). 
 is an object-oriented 
.


In broad strokes, programming languages are classified by 
 and 
 with 
 distinguished from 
. Traditionally, programming languages have been regarded as describing computation in terms of imperative sentences, i.e. issuing commands. These are generally called 
 languages. A great deal of research in programming languages has been aimed at blurring the distinction between a program as a set of instructions and a program as an assertion about the desired answer, which is the main feature of 
.
 More refined paradigms include 
, 
, 
, and 
; some languages are hybrids of paradigms or multi-paradigmatic. An 
 is not so much a paradigm as a direct model of an underlying machine architecture. By purpose, programming languages might be considered general purpose, 
, scripting languages, domain-specific languages, or concurrent/distributed languages (or a combination of these).
 Some general purpose languages were designed largely with educational goals.


A programming language may also be classified by factors unrelated to the programming paradigm. For instance, most programming languages use 
 keywords, while 
. Other languages may be classified as being 
 or not.


				Pages for logged out editors 

			
 (
: 
) is a 
 and 
 in 
 in the 
 of north-eastern 
.

In 
 the 
 was first mentioned in 1414.

The 
 lies at an 
 of 284 meters and covers an 
 consisting of 7.942 km². It has a 
 of about 191 people.



This 
 
 article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.


 was a 
 
 (one of the "
") of 
's 
, built for service in 
. She was ordered on 6 November 1943, and was 
 on 19 July 1944 at 
, 
, as yard number 1652. She was 
 on 16 September 1944, and 
 under the command of 
 Otto Niethmann on 19 October 1944.


Like all 
 
, 
 had a displacement of 1,621 tonnes (1,595 long tons) when at the surface and 1,819 tonnes (1,790 long tons) while submerged. She had a total length of 76.70 m (251 ft 8 in) (
), a beam of 8 m (26 ft 3 in), and a draught of 6.32 m (20 ft 9 in).
 The submarine was powered by two 
 supercharged six-cylinder M6V40/46KBB diesel engines each providing 4,000 
 (2,900 
; 3,900 
), two 
 GU365/30 
 electric motors each providing 5,000 PS (3,700 kW; 4,900 shp), and two Siemens-Schuckert 
 GV232/28 electric motors each providing 226 PS (166 kW; 223 shp).


The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 15.6 knots (28.9 km/h; 18.0 mph) and a submerged speed of 17.2 knots (31.9 km/h; 19.8 mph). When running on silent motors the boat could operate at a speed of 6.1 knots (11.3 km/h; 7.0 mph). When submerged, the boat could operate at 5 knots (9.3 km/h; 5.8 mph) for 340 nautical miles (630 km; 390 mi); when surfaced, she could travel 15,500 nautical miles (28,700 km; 17,800 mi) at 10 knots (19 km/h; 12 mph).
 
 was fitted with six 53.3 cm (21.0 in) 
 in the bow and four 
 
. She could carry twenty-three 
 or seventeen torpedoes and twelve 
. The 
 was five officers and fifty-two men.


 was 
 on 3 May 1945, at 
, as part of 
. The wreck was later raised and broken up.



				Pages for logged out editors 

			




 is a 
, 
. Its design philosophy emphasizes 
 with the use of 
.


Python is 
 and 
. It supports multiple 
, including 
 (particularly 
), 
 and 
. It is often described as a "batteries included" language due to its comprehensive 
.


 began working on Python in the late 1980s as a successor to the 
 and first released it in 1991 as Python 0.9.0.
 Python 2.0 was released in 2000 and introduced new features such as 
, 
 garbage collection, 
, and 
 support. Python 3.0, released in 2008, was a major revision  not completely 
 with earlier versions. Python 2.7.18, released in 2020, was the last release of Python 2.


Python consistently ranks as one of the most popular programming languages.


Python was conceived in the late 1980s
 by 
 at 
 (CWI) in the 
 as a successor to the 
, which was inspired by 
,
 capable of 
 (from the start plus new capabilities in Python 3.11) and interfacing with the 
 operating system.
 Its implementation began in December 1989.
 Van Rossum shouldered sole responsibility for the project, as the lead developer, until 12 July 2018, when he announced his "permanent vacation" from his responsibilities as Python's "
", a title the Python community bestowed upon him to reflect his long-term commitment as the project's chief decision-maker.
 In January 2019, active Python core developers elected a five-member Steering Council to lead the project.


Python 2.0 was released on 16 October 2000, with many major new features.
 Python 3.0, released on 3 December 2008, with many of its major features 
 to Python 2.6.x
 and 2.7.x.  Releases of Python 3 include the 
 utility, which automates the translation of Python 2 code to Python 3.


Python 2.7's 
 was initially set for 2015, then postponed to 2020 out of concern that a large body of existing code could not easily be forward-ported to Python 3.
  No further security patches or other improvements will be released for it.
 Currently only 3.7 and later are supported. In 2021, Python 3.9.2 and 3.8.8 were expedited
 as all versions of Python (including 2.7
) had security issues leading to possible 
 and 
.


In 2022, Python 3.10.4 and 3.9.12 were expedited
 and 3.8.13, and 3.7.13, because of many security issues.
 When Python 3.9.13 was released in May 2022, it was announced that the 3.9 series (joining the older series 3.8 and 3.7) will only receive security fixes going forward.
 On September 7, 2022, four new releases were made due to a potential 
: 3.10.7, 3.9.14, 3.8.14, and 3.7.14.


As of November 2022,
 Python 3.11.0 is the current stable release and among the notable changes from 3.10 are that it is 10–60% faster and significantly improved error reporting.


Python 3.12 (alpha 2) has improved error messages.

The deprecated 
 module has been removed from Python 3.12 (alpha). And a number of other old, broken and deprecated functions (e.g. from 
 module), classes and methods have been removed. The deprecated 
 and 
 length members of the 
 implementation of 
 objects were removed,
 to make 
 the default in later Python versions.

Historically, Python 3 also made changes from Python 2, e.g. changed the division operator.

Python is a 
. 
 and 
 are fully supported, and many of their features support functional programming and 
 (including 
 and 
).
 Many other paradigms are supported via extensions, including 
 and 
.


Python uses 
 and a combination of 
 and a cycle-detecting garbage collector for 
.
 It uses dynamic 
 (
), which binds method and variable names during program execution.

Its design offers some support for functional programming in the 
 tradition. It has 
,
and
 functions; 
, 
, sets, and 
 expressions.
 The standard library has two modules (
 and 
) that implement functional tools borrowed from 
 and 
.


Its core philosophy is summarized in the document 
 (
), which includes 
 such as:


Rather than building all of its functionality into its core, Python was designed to be highly 
 via modules. This compact modularity has made it particularly popular as a means of adding programmable interfaces to existing applications. Van Rossum's vision of a small core language with a large standard library and easily extensible interpreter stemmed from his frustrations with 
, which espoused the opposite approach.


Python strives for a simpler, less-cluttered syntax and grammar while giving developers a choice in their coding methodology. In contrast to 
's "
" motto, Python embraces a "there should be one—and preferably only one—obvious way to do it"  philosophy.
 
, a 
 at the 
 and Python book author, wrote: "To describe something as 'clever' is 
 considered a compliment in the Python culture."


Python's developers strive to avoid 
 and reject patches to non-critical parts of the 
 reference implementation that would offer marginal increases in speed at the cost of clarity.
 When speed is important, a Python programmer can move time-critical functions to extension modules written in languages such as C; or use 
, a 
. 
 is also available, which translates a Python script into C and makes direct C-level API calls into the Python interpreter.

Python's developers aim for it to be fun to use. This is reflected in its name—a tribute to the British comedy group 
—and in occasionally playful approaches to tutorials and reference materials, such as the use of the terms "spam", and "eggs" (a reference to 
) in examples, instead of the often-used 
.


A common 
 in the Python community is 
, which has a wide range of meanings related to program style. "Pythonic" code may use Python idioms well, be natural or show fluency in the language, or conform with Python's minimalist philosophy and emphasis on readability. Code that is difficult to understand or reads like a rough transcription from another programming language is called 
.


Python users and admirers, especially those considered knowledgeable or experienced, are often referred to as 
.


Python is meant to be an easily readable language. Its formatting is visually uncluttered and often uses English keywords where other languages use punctuation. Unlike many other languages, it does not use 
 to delimit blocks, and semicolons after statements are allowed but rarely used. It has fewer syntactic exceptions and special cases than 
 or 
.


Python uses 
 indentation, rather than 
 or keywords, to delimit 
. An increase in indentation comes after certain statements; a decrease in indentation signifies the end of the current block.
 Thus, the program's visual structure accurately represents its semantic structure.
 This feature is sometimes termed the 
. Some other languages use indentation this way; but in most, indentation has no semantic meaning. The recommended indent size is four spaces.


Python's 
 include:

The assignment statement (
) binds a name as a 
 to a separate, dynamically-allocated 
. Variables may subsequently be rebound at any time to any object. In Python, a variable name is a generic reference holder without a fixed 
; however, it always refers to 
 object with a type. This is called 
—in contrast to 
 languages, where each variable may contain only a value of a certain type.

Python does not support 
 optimization or 
, and, according to Van Rossum, it never will.
 However, better support for 
-like functionality is provided by extending Python's 
.
 Before 2.5, generators were 
 
; data was passed unidirectionally out of the generator. From Python 2.5 on, it is possible to pass data back into a generator function; and from version 3.3, it can be passed through multiple stack levels.


Python's 
 include:

In Python, a distinction between expressions and statements is rigidly enforced, in contrast to languages such as 
, 
, or 
. This leads to duplicating some functionality. For example:

Statements cannot be a part of an expression—so list and other comprehensions or 
, all being expressions, cannot contain statements. A particular case is that an assignment statement such as 
 cannot form part of the conditional expression of a conditional statement. This has the advantage of avoiding a classic C error of mistaking an assignment operator 
 for an equality operator 
 in conditions: 
 is syntactically valid (but probably unintended) C code, but 
 causes a syntax error in Python.

 on objects are 
 attached to the object's class; the syntax 
 is, for normal methods and functions, 
 for 
. Python methods have an explicit 
 parameter to access 
, in contrast to the implicit self (or 
) in some other object-oriented programming languages (e.g., 
, Java, 
, 
).
 Python also provides methods, often called 
 (due to their names beginning and ending with double-underscores), to allow user-defined classes to modify how they are handled by native operations including length, comparison, in 
 and type conversion.


Python uses 
 and has typed objects but untyped variable names. Type constraints are not checked at 
; rather, operations on an object may fail, signifying that it is not of a suitable type. Despite being 
, Python is 
, forbidding operations that are not well-defined (for example, adding a number to a string) rather than silently attempting to make sense of them.

Python allows programmers to define their own types using 
, most often used for 
. New 
 of classes are constructed by calling the class (for example, 
 or 
), and the classes are instances of the 
 
 (itself an instance of itself), allowing metaprogramming and 
.

Before version 3.0, Python had two kinds of classes (both using the same syntax): 
 and 
,
 current Python versions only support the semantics new style.

The long-term plan is to support 
.
 Python's syntax allows specifying static types, but they are not checked in the default implementation, 
. An experimental optional static type-checker, 
, supports compile-time type checking.




Python has the usual symbols for arithmetic operators (
, 
, 
, 
), the floor division operator 
 and the 
 
 (where the remainder can be negative,  e.g. 
). It also has 
 for 
, e.g. 
 and 
, and a matrix‑multiplication operator 
 .
 These operators work like in traditional math; with the same 
, the operators 
 (
 and 
 can also be 
 to represent positive and negative numbers respectively).

The division between integers produces floating-point results. The behavior of division has changed significantly over time:


In Python terms, 
 is 
 (or simply 
), and 
 is 
 
 before version 3.0 is 
.


Rounding towards negative infinity, though different from most languages, adds consistency. For instance, it means that the equation 
 is always true. It also means that the equation 
 is valid for both positive and negative values of 
. However, maintaining the validity of this equation means that while the result of 
 is, as expected, in the 
 [0, 
), where 
 is a positive integer, it has to lie in the interval (
, 0] when 
 is negative.


Python provides a 
 function for 
 a float to the nearest integer. For 
, Python 3 uses 
: 
 and 
 both produce 
.
 Versions before 3 used 
: 
 is 
, 
 is 
.


Python allows boolean expressions with multiple equality relations in a manner that is consistent with general use in mathematics. For example, the expression 
 tests whether 
 is less than 
 and 
 is less than 
.
 C-derived languages interpret this expression differently: in C, the expression would first evaluate 
, resulting in 0 or 1, and that result would then be compared with 
.


Python uses 
 for all integer operations. The 
 type/class in the 
 module provides 
 to a pre-defined arbitrary precision and several rounding modes.
 The 
 class in the 
 module provides arbitrary precision for 
.


Due to Python's extensive mathematics library, and the third-party library 
 that further extends the native capabilities, it is frequently used as a scientific scripting language to aid in problems such as numerical data processing and manipulation.


 program:

Program to calculate the 
 of a positive integer:

Python's large standard library
 provides tools suited to many tasks and is commonly cited as one of its greatest strengths. For Internet-facing applications, many standard formats and protocols such as 
 and 
 are supported. It includes modules for creating 
, connecting to 
, 
, arithmetic with arbitrary-precision decimals,
 manipulating 
, and 
.

Some parts of the standard library are covered by specifications—for example, the 
 (WSGI) implementation 
 follows PEP 333
—but most are specified by their code, internal documentation, and 
. However, because most of the standard library is cross-platform Python code, only a few modules need altering or rewriting for variant implementations.

As of 14 November 2022,
 the 
 (PyPI), the official repository for third-party Python software, contains over 415,000
 packages with a wide range of functionality, including:

Most Python implementations (including CPython) include a 
 (REPL), permitting them to function as a 
 for which users enter statements sequentially and receive results immediately.

Python also comes with an 
 called 
, which is more beginner-oriented.

Other shells, including 
 and 
, add further abilities such as improved auto-completion, session state retention, and 
.

As well as standard desktop 
, there are 
-based IDEs, including 
, for developing science- and math-related programs; 
, a browser-based IDE and hosting environment; and Canopy IDE, a commercial IDE emphasizing 
.


 is the 
 of Python. It is written in C, meeting the 
 standard (Python 3.11 uses 
) with several select 
 features (With later C versions out, it is considered outdated.
  CPython includes its own C extensions, but third-party extensions are not limited to older C versions—e.g. they can be implemented with 
 or C++.
) It 
 Python programs into an intermediate 
 which is then executed by its 
.
 CPython is distributed with a large standard library written in a mixture of C and native Python, and is available for many platforms, including Windows (starting with Python 3.9, the Python installer deliberately fails to install on 
 and 8;
 
 was supported until Python 3.5) and most modern 
 systems, including macOS (and 
 Macs, since Python 3.9.1, with experimental installer) and unofficial support for e.g. 
.
 Platform portability was one of its earliest priorities.
 (During Python 1 and 2 development, even 
 and 
 were supported,
 but support has since been dropped for many platforms.)

Other just-in-time Python compilers have been developed, but are now unsupported:

There are several compilers to high-level object languages, with either unrestricted Python, a restricted subset of Python, or a language similar to Python as the source language:

Specialized:

Older projects (or not to be used with Python 3.x and latest syntax):

Performance comparison of various Python implementations on a non-numerical (combinatorial) workload was presented at EuroSciPy '13.
 Python's performance compared to other programming languages is also benchmarked by 
.


Python's development is conducted largely through the 
 (PEP) process, the primary mechanism for proposing major new features, collecting community input on issues, and documenting Python design decisions.
 Python coding style is covered in PEP 8.
 Outstanding PEPs are reviewed and commented on by the Python community and the steering council.


Enhancement of the language corresponds with the development of the CPython reference implementation. The mailing list python-dev is the primary forum for the language's development. Specific issues were originally discussed in the 
 
 hosted at by the foundation.
 In 2022, all issues and discussions were migrated to 
.
 Development originally took place on a 
 source-code repository running 
, until Python moved to 
 in January 2017.


CPython's public releases come in three types, distinguished by which part of the version number is incremented:

Many 
 are also released as previews and for testing before final releases. Although there is a rough schedule for each release, they are often delayed if the code is not ready. Python's development team monitors the state of the code by running the large 
 suite during development.


The major 
 on Python is 
. There are also special Python mentoring programs, such as 
.

Python 3.10 deprecated 
 (to be removed in Python 3.12; meaning Python extensions
 need to be modified by then),
 and added 
 to the language.


Tools that can generate documentation for Python API include 
 (available as part of the standard library), 
, 
 and its forks, 
 and 
, among others.


Python's name is derived from the British comedy group 
, whom Python creator Guido van Rossum enjoyed while developing the language. Monty Python references appear frequently in Python code and culture;
 for example, the 
 often used in Python literature are 
 instead of the traditional 
.
 The official Python documentation also contains various references to Monty Python routines.


The prefix 
 is used to show that something is related to Python. Examples of the use of this prefix in names of Python applications or libraries include 
, a 
 of 
 to Python (commonly used to create games); 
 and 
, which bind 
 and GTK to Python respectively; and 
, a Python implementation originally written in Python.

Since 2003, Python has consistently ranked in the top ten most popular programming languages in the 
 where as of December 2022
 it was the most popular language (ahead of C, C++, and 
).
 It was selected Programming Language of the Year (for "the highest rise in ratings in a year") in 2007, 2010, 2018, and 2020 (the only language to have done so four times as of 2020
).

An empirical study found that scripting languages, such as Python, are more productive than conventional languages, such as C and Java, for programming problems involving string manipulation and search in a dictionary, and determined that memory consumption was often "better than Java and not much worse than C or C++".


Large organizations that use Python include 
, 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
, 
,
 
,
 and some smaller entities like 
 and 
.
 The social news networking site 
 was written mostly in Python.


Python can serve as a 
 for 
, e.g., via 
 for the 
.
 With 
, a standard API has evolved to facilitate these applications. 
 like 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, Bottle, and 
 support developers in the design and maintenance of complex applications. Pyjs and 
 can be used to develop the client-side of Ajax-based applications. 
 can be used as a 
 to a relational database. 
 is a framework to program communications between computers, and is used (for example) by 
.

Libraries such as 
, 
, and 
 allow the effective use of Python in scientific computing,
 with specialized libraries such as 
 and 
 providing domain-specific functionality. 
 is a 
 with a 
 programmable in Python: its library covers many aspects of 
, including 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 
 has Python bindings with a rich set of features for 
 and 
.


Python is commonly used in 
 projects and machine learning projects with the help of libraries like 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 As a scripting language with a 
, simple syntax, and rich text processing tools, Python is often used for 
.


Python can also be used to create games, with libraries such as 
, which can make 2D games.

Python has been successfully embedded in many software products as a scripting language, including in 
 software such as 
, 3D parametric modelers like 
, 3D animation packages such as 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, the visual effects compositor 
, 2D imaging programs like 
,
 
, 
 and 
,
 and 
 programs like 
 and 
. 
 uses Python as a 
 to show complex structures such as C++ containers. 
 promotes Python as the best choice for writing scripts in 
.
 It has also been used in several video games,
 and has been adopted as first of the three available 
 in 
, the other two being 
 and 
.


Many operating systems include Python as a standard component. It ships with most 
,
 
 (using Python 2.7), 
 (as a package), 
, and 
 (as a package) and can be used from the command line (terminal). Many Linux distributions use installers written in Python: 
 uses the 
 installer, while 
 and 
 use the 
 installer. 
 uses Python in its 
, 
.

Python is used extensively in the 
 industry, including in exploit development.


Most of the 
 software for the 
 XO, developed at 
 since 2008, is written in Python.
 The 
 
 project has adopted Python as its main user-programming language.

 includes Python and intends to replace Java with Python. Its Python Scripting Provider is a core feature
 since Version 4.0 from 7 February 2013.

Python's design and philosophy have influenced many other programming languages:

Python's development practices have also been emulated by other languages. For example, the practice of requiring a document describing the rationale for, and issues surrounding, a change to the language (in Python, a PEP) is also used in 
,
 
,
 and Swift.







The 
 (
 or 
)
 was the major land-based 
 service component of the 
 and 
 aerial warfare service branch of the United States
 during and immediately after 
 (1941–1945). It was created on 20 June 1941 as successor to the previous 
 and is the direct predecessor of the 
, today one of the six 
. The AAF was a component of the 
, which on 2 March 1942
 was divided functionally by executive order into three autonomous forces: the 
, the 
 (which in 1943 became the 
), and the Army Air Forces. Each of these forces had a commanding general who reported directly to the 
.

The AAF administered all parts of military aviation formerly distributed among the Air Corps, General Headquarters Air Force, and the ground forces' corps area commanders and thus became the first air organization of the U.S. Army to control its own installations and support personnel. The peak size of the AAF during the 
 was over 2.4 million men and women in service and nearly 80,000 aircraft by 1944, and 783 domestic bases in December 1943.
 By "
", the Army Air Forces had 1.25 million men stationed overseas and operated from more than 1,600 airfields worldwide.


The Army Air Forces was created in June 1941 to provide the air arm greater autonomy in which to expand more efficiently, to provide a structure for the additional command echelons required by a vastly increased force, and to end an increasingly divisive administrative battle within the Army over control of aviation doctrine and organization that had been ongoing since the creation of an 
 within the 
 in 1914. The AAF succeeded both the Air Corps, which had been the statutory military aviation branch since 1926 and the GHQ Air Force, which had been activated in 1935 to quiet the demands of airmen for an independent Air Force similar to the 
 which 
 in the 
.

Although other nations already had separate air forces independent of their army or navy (such as the British 
 and the German 
), the AAF remained a part of the Army until a defense reorganization in the post-war period resulted in the passage by the 
 of the 
 with the creation of an independent 
 in September 1947.

In its expansion and conduct of the war, the AAF became more than just an arm of the greater organization. By the end of World War II, the Army Air Forces had become virtually an independent service. By regulation and executive order, it was a subordinate agency of the 
 (as were the Army Ground Forces and the Army Service Forces) tasked only with organizing, training, and equipping combat units and limited in responsibility to the continental United States. In reality, Headquarters AAF controlled the conduct of all aspects of the air war in every part of the world, determining air policy and issuing orders without transmitting them through the Army Chief of Staff. This "contrast between theory and fact is...fundamental to an understanding of the AAF."


The roots of the Army Air Forces arose in the formulation of theories of 
 at the 
 that gave new impetus to arguments for an independent air force, beginning with those espoused by Brig. Gen. 
 that led to his later 
. Despite a perception of resistance and even obstruction then by the bureaucracy in the War Department 
 (WDGS), much of which was attributable to lack of funds, the Air Corps later made great strides in the 1930s, both organizationally and in doctrine. A strategy stressing precision bombing of industrial targets by heavily armed, long-range bombers emerged, formulated by the men who would become its leaders.


A major step toward a separate air force came in March 1935, when the command of all combat air units within the Continental United States (CONUS) was centralized under a single organization called the 
. Since 1920, control of aviation units had resided with commanders of the 
 (a peacetime ground forces administrative echelon), following the model established by commanding General 
 during World War I. In 1924, the General Staff planned for a wartime activation of an Army general headquarters (GHQ), similar to the 
 model of 
, with a GHQ Air Force as a subordinate component. Both were created in 1933 when a small conflict with Cuba seemed possible following a 
 but was not activated.

The activation of GHQ Air Force represented a compromise between strategic airpower advocates and ground force commanders who demanded that the Air Corps mission remain tied to that of the land forces. Airpower advocates achieved a centralized control of air units under an air commander, while the WDGS divided authority within the air arm and assured a continuing policy of support of ground operations as its primary role.
 GHQ Air Force organized combat groups administratively into a strike force of three wings deployed to the 
, Pacific, and 
 but was small in comparison to European air forces. Lines of authority were difficult, at best, since GHQ Air Force controlled only operations of its combat units while the Air Corps was still responsible for doctrine, acquisition of aircraft, and training. Corps area commanders continued to exercise control over airfields and administration of personnel, and in the overseas departments, operational control of units as well.
 Between March 1935 and September 1938, the commanders of GHQ Air Force and the Air Corps, Major Generals 
 and 
 respectively, clashed philosophically over the direction in which the air arm was moving, exacerbating the difficulties.


The expected activation of Army General Headquarters prompted 
 
 to request a reorganization study from Chief of the Air Corps Maj. Gen. 
 resulting on 5 October 1940 in a proposal for creation of an air staff, unification of the air arm under one commander, and equality with the ground and supply forces. Arnold's proposal was immediately opposed by the General Staff in all respects, rehashing its traditional doctrinal argument that, in the event of war, the Air Corps would have no mission independent of support of the ground forces. Marshall implemented a compromise that the Air Corps found entirely inadequate, naming Arnold as acting "Deputy Chief of Staff for Air" but rejecting all organizational points of his proposal. GHQ Air Force instead was assigned to the control of Army General Headquarters, although the latter was a training and not an operational component, when it was activated in November 1940. A division of the GHQ Air Force into four geographical air defense districts on 19 October 1940 was concurrent with the creation of air forces to defend 
 and the 
. The air districts were converted in March 1941 into numbered air forces with a subordinate organization of 54 groups.


The likelihood of U.S. participation in 
 prompted the most radical reorganization of the 
 branch in its history, developing a structure that both unified command of all air elements and gave it total autonomy and equality with the ground forces by March 1942.

In the spring of 1941, the success in Europe of air operations conducted under centralized control (as exemplified by the British 
 and the German 
's military air arm, the 
) made clear that the splintering of authority in the American air forces, characterized as "
-headed" by one congressman,
 had caused a disturbing lack of clear channels of command. Less than five months after the rejection of Arnold's reorganization proposal, a joint U.S.-British strategic planning agreement (
) refuted the General Staff's argument that the Air Corps had no wartime mission except to support ground forces.
 A struggle with the General Staff over control of air defense of the United States had been won by airmen and vested in four command units called "numbered air forces", but the bureaucratic conflict threatened to renew the dormant struggle for an independent United States Air Force. Marshall had come to the view that the air forces needed a "simpler system" and a unified command. Working with Arnold and 
, recently appointed to the long-vacant position of Assistant Secretary of War for Air, he reached a consensus that quasi-autonomy for the air forces was preferable to immediate separation.


On 20 June 1941, to grant additional autonomy to the air forces and to avoid binding legislation from Congress, the War Department revised the army regulation governing the organization of Army aviation, AR 95–5.
 Arnold assumed the title of 
, creating an echelon of command over all military aviation components for the first time and ending the dual status of the Air Corps and GHQ Air Force, which was renamed 
 (AFCC) in the new organization. The AAF gained the formal "Air Staff" long opposed by the General Staff,
 and a single air commander,
 but still did not have equal status with the Army ground forces, and air units continued to report through two chains of command.
 The commanding general of AFCC gained control of his stations and court martial authority over his personnel,
 but under the new field manual FM-5 the Army General Headquarters had the power to detach units from AFCC at will by creating task forces, the WDGS still controlled the AAF budget and finances, and the AAF had no jurisdiction over units of the 
 providing "housekeeping services" as support
 nor of air units, bases, and personnel located outside the continental United States.


Arnold and Marshall agreed that the AAF would enjoy a general autonomy within the War Department (similar to that of the 
 within the 
)
 until the end of the war, while its commanders would cease lobbying for independence.
 Marshall, a strong proponent of airpower, left understood that the Air Force would likely achieve its independence following the war. Soon after the Japanese 
 on 7 December 1941, in recognition of importance of the role of the Army Air Forces, Arnold was given a seat on the 
, the planning staff that served as the focal point of American strategic planning during the war, in order that the United States would have an air representative in staff talks with their British counterparts on the 
. In effect the head of the AAF gained equality with Marshall. While this step was never officially recognized by the 
, and was bitterly disputed behind the scenes at every opportunity, it nevertheless succeeded as a pragmatic foundation for the future separation of the Air Force.


Under the revision of AR 95–5, the Army Air Forces consisted of three major components: Headquarters AAF, Air Force Combat Command, and the Air Corps. Yet the reforms were incomplete, subject to reversal with a change of mood at the War Department, and of dubious legality.
 By November 1941, on the eve of U.S. entry into the war, the division of authority within the Army as a whole, caused by the activation of Army GHQ a year before, had led to a "battle of memos" between it and the WDGS over administering the AAF, prompting Marshall to state that he had "the poorest command post in the Army" when defense commands showed a "disturbing failure to follow through on orders".
 To streamline the AAF in preparation for war, with a goal of centralized planning and decentralized execution of operations, in October 1941 Arnold submitted to the WDGS essentially the same reorganization plan it had rejected a year before, this time crafted by Chief of Air Staff Brig. Gen. 
.
 When this plan was not given any consideration, Arnold reworded the proposal the following month which, in the face of Marshall's dissatisfaction with Army GHQ, the War Plans Division accepted. Just before Pearl Harbor, Marshall recalled an Air Corps officer, Brig. Gen. 
, from an observer group in England and appointed him to chair a "War Department Reorganization Committee" within the War Plans Division, using Arnold's and Spaatz's plan as a blueprint.


After war began, Congress enacted the 
 on 18 December 1941 endowing President 
 with virtual 
 to reorganize the 
 as he found necessary.
 Under it, on 28 February 1942, Roosevelt issued 
, based on Marshall's recommendation and the work of McNarney's committee. The EO changed Arnold's title to 
 effective 9 March 1942, making him co-equal with the commanding generals of the new 
 and 
, the other two components of the 
. The War Department issued Circular No. 59 on 2 March that carried out the executive order,
 intended (as with the creation of the 
 in World War I) as a wartime expedient to expire six months after the end of the war.
 The three components replaced a multiplicity of branches and organizations, reduced the WDGS greatly in size, and proportionally increased the representation of the air forces members on it to 50%.


In addition to dissolving both Army General Headquarters and the chiefs of the 
, and assigning their training functions to the Army Ground Forces, War Department Circular 59 reorganized the Army Air Forces, disbanding both Air Force Combat Command and the Office of Chief of the Air Corps (OCAC), eliminating all its training and organizational functions, which removed an entire layer of authority.
 Taking their former functions were eleven numbered air forces (later raised to sixteen) and six support commands (which became eight in January 1943). The circular also restated the mission of the AAF, in theory removing from it responsibility for strategic planning and making it only a Zone of Interior "training and supply agency", but from the start AAF officers viewed this as a "paper" restriction negated by Arnold's place on both the Joint and Combined Chiefs, which gave him strategic planning authority for the AAF,
 a viewpoint that was formally sanctioned by the War Department in mid-1943 and endorsed by the president.


The Circular No. 59 reorganization directed the AAF to operate under a complex division of administrative control performed by a policy staff, an operating staff, and the support commands (formerly "field activities" of the OCAC). The former field activities operated under a "bureau" structure, with both policy and operating functions vested in staff-type officers who often exercised command and policy authority without responsibility for results, a system held over from the Air Corps years. The concept of an "operating staff", or directorates, was modeled on the RAF system that had been much admired by the observer groups sent over in 1941, and resulted from a desire to place experts in various aspects of military aviation into key positions of implementation. However functions often overlapped, communication and coordination between the divisions failed or was ignored, policy prerogatives were usurped by the directorates, and they became overburdened with detail, all contributing to the diversion of the directorates from their original purpose. The system of directorates in particular handicapped the developing operational training program (see 
 below), preventing establishment of an OTU command and having a tendency to micromanage because of the lack of centralized control.
 Four main directorates—Military Requirements, Technical Services, Personnel, and Management Control—were created, each with multiple sub-directorates, and eventually more than thirty offices were authorized to issue orders in the name of the commanding general.


Among the headquarters directorates were Technical Services,
 Air Defense, Base Services, Ground-Air Support, Management Control, Military Equipment,
 
, and Procurement & Distribution.


A "strong and growing dissatisfaction" with the organization led to an attempt by Lovett in September 1942 to make the system work by bringing the Directorate of Management Control
 and several traditional offices that had been moved to the operating staff, including the Air Judge Advocate and Budget Officer, back under the policy staff umbrella. When this adjustment failed to resolve the problems, the system was scrapped and all functions combined into a single restructured air staff.
 The hierarchical "command" principle, in which a single commander has direct final accountability but delegates authority to staff, was adopted AAF-wide in a major reorganization and consolidation on 29 March 1943. The four main directorates and seventeen subordinate directorates (the "operating staff")
 were abolished as an unnecessary level of authority, and execution of policies was removed from the staffs to be assigned solely to field organizations along functional lines. The policy functions of the directorates were reorganized and consolidated into offices regrouped along conventional military lines under six assistant chiefs of air staff (AC/AS): Personnel; Intelligence; Operations, Commitments, and Requirements (OC&R); Materiel, Maintenance, and Distribution (MM&D);
 Plans; and Training. Command of Headquarters AAF resided in a Chief of Air Staff and three deputies.


This wartime structure remained essentially unchanged for the remainder of hostilities. In October 1944 Arnold, to begin a process of reorganization for reducing the structure, proposed to eliminate the AC/AS, Training and move his office into OC&R, changing it to Operations, Training and Requirements (OT&R)
 but the mergers were never effected. On 23 August 1945, after the capitulation of Japan, realignment took place with the complete elimination of OC&R. The now five assistant chiefs of air staff were designated AC/AS-1 through -5 corresponding to Personnel, Intelligence, Operations and Training, Materiel and Supply, and Plans.


Most personnel of the Army Air Forces were drawn from the Air Corps. In May 1945, 88 per cent of officers serving in the Army Air Forces were commissioned in the Air Corps, while 82 per cent of enlisted members assigned to AAF units and bases had the Air Corps as their combat arm branch.
 While officially the air arm was the 
, the term 
 persisted colloquially among the public as well as veteran airmen; in addition, the singular 
 often crept into popular and even official use, reflected by the designation 
 in 1941–42.
 This misnomer was also used on official recruiting posters (see image above) and was important in promoting the idea of an "Air Force" as an independent service. 
, a 
 movie star serving as an AAF pilot, used the terms "Air Corps" and "Air Forces" interchangeably in the narration of the 1942 recruiting short 
. The term "Air Force" also appeared prominently in 
's 1945 War Department indoctrination film 
, of the famous iconic  
 series, as an animated map graphic of equal prominence to that of the Army and Navy.


The Air Corps at the direction of President Roosevelt began a rapid expansion from the spring of 1939 forward, partly from the 
 created at the end of 1938, with the goal of providing an adequate air force for defense of the Western Hemisphere. An initial "25-group program", announced in April 1939, called for 50,000 men. However, when war broke out in September 1939 the Air Corps still had only 800 first-line combat aircraft and 76 bases, including 21 major installations and depots.
 American fighter aircraft were inferior to the British 
 and 
, and German 
 and 
. 
 wrote in late 1940 after visiting Britain that the "best American fighter planes already delivered to the British are used by them either as advanced trainers—or for fighting equally obsolete Italian planes in the Middle East. That is all they are good for." RAF crews he interviewed said that by spring 1941 a fighter engaging Germans had to have the capability to reach 400 mph in speed, fight at 30,000–35,000 feet, be simple to take off, provide armor for the pilot, and carry 12 machine guns or six cannons, all attributes lacking in American aircraft.


Following the successful 
 in May 1940, Roosevelt asked Congress for a supplemental appropriation of nearly a billion dollars, a production program of 50,000 aircraft a year, and a military air force of 50,000 aircraft (of which 36,500 would be Army).
 Accelerated programs followed in the Air Corps that repeatedly revised expansion goals, resulting in plans for 84 combat groups, 7,799 combat aircraft, and the annual addition to the force of 30,000 new pilots and 100,000 technical personnel.
 The accelerated expansion programs resulted in a force of 156 airfields and 152,125 personnel at the time of the creation of the Army Air Forces.


In its expansion during World War II, the AAF became the world's most powerful air force. From the Air Corps of 1939, with 20,000 men and 2,400 planes, to the nearly autonomous AAF of 1944, with almost 2.4 million personnel and 80,000 aircraft, was a remarkable expansion. Robert A. Lovett, the Assistant Secretary of War for Air, together with Arnold, presided over an increase greater than for either the ground Army or the Navy, while at the same time dispatching combat air forces to the battlefronts.



The 
, occurring only two days after the creation of the Army Air Forces, caused an immediate reassessment of U.S. defense strategy and policy. The need for an offensive strategy to defeat the 
 required further enlargement and modernization of all the military services, including the new AAF. In addition, the invasion produced a new 
 partner in Russia, creating even greater demands on an already struggling American aircraft production.


An offensive strategy required several types of urgent and sustained effort. In addition to the development and manufacture of aircraft in massive numbers, the Army Air Forces had to establish a global logistics network to supply, maintain, and repair the huge force; recruit and train personnel; and sustain the health, welfare, and morale of its troops. The process was driven by the pace of aircraft production, not the training program,
 and was ably aided by the direction of Lovett, who for all practical purposes became "Secretary of the Air Corps".


A lawyer and a banker, Lovett had prior experience with the aviation industry that translated into realistic production goals and harmony in integrating the plans of the AAF with those of the Army as a whole.
 Lovett initially believed that President Roosevelt's demand following the 
 for 60,000 airplanes in 1942 and 125,000 in 1943 was grossly ambitious. However, working closely with General Arnold and engaging the capacity of the 
 brought about an effort that produced almost 100,000 aircraft in 1944.
 The AAF reached its wartime inventory peak of nearly 80,000 aircraft in July 1944, 41% of them first line combat aircraft, before trimming back to 73,000 at the end of the year following a large reduction in the number of trainers needed.


The logistical demands of this armada were met by the creation of the 
 on 17 October 1941 to provide service units and maintain 250 depots in the United States; the elevation of the 
 to full command status on 9 March 1942 to develop and procure aircraft, equipment, and parts; and the merger of these commands into the 
 on 31 August 1944.
 In addition to carrying personnel and cargo, the 
 made deliveries of almost 270,000 aircraft worldwide while losing only 1,013 in the process.
 The operation of the stateside depots was done largely by more than 300,000 civilian maintenance employees, many of them women, freeing a like number of Air Forces mechanics for overseas duty.
 In all facets of the service, more than 420,000 civilian personnel were employed by the AAF.


The huge increases in aircraft inventory resulted in a similar increase in personnel, expanding sixteen-fold in less than three years following its formation, and changed the personnel policies under which the Air Service and Air Corps had operated since the National Defense Act of 1920. No longer could pilots represent 90% of commissioned officers. The need for large numbers of specialists in administration and technical services resulted in the establishment of an 
 in 
, and the direct commissioning of thousands of professionals.
 Even so, 193,000 new pilots entered the AAF during World War II, while 124,000 other candidates failed at some point during training or were killed in accidents.


The requirements for new pilots resulted in a massive expansion of the Aviation Cadet program, which had so many volunteers that the AAF created a reserve pool that held qualified pilot candidates until they could be called to active duty, rather than losing them in the draft. By 1944, this pool became surplus, and 24,000 were sent to the 
 for retraining as 
, and 6,000 to the 
.
 Pilot standards were changed to reduce the minimum age from 20 to 18, and eliminated the educational requirement of at least two years of college. Two fighter pilot beneficiaries of this change went on to become brigadier generals in the 
, 
 and 
.


Air crew needs resulted in the successful training of 43,000 
, 49,000 
, and 309,000 flexible gunners, many of whom also specialized in other aspects of air crew duties.
 7,800 men qualified as 
 flight engineers and 1,000 more as 
 operators in 
, all of whom received commissions. Almost 1.4 million men received technical training as aircraft mechanics, electronics specialists, and other technicians. Non-aircraft related support services were provided by airmen trained by the 
, but the AAF increasingly exerted influence on the curricula of these courses in anticipation of future independence.


 comprised approximately six per cent of this force (145,242 personnel in June 1944).
 In 1940, pressured by 
 and some Northern members of 
, General Arnold agreed to accept blacks for pilot training, albeit on a 
 basis. A flight training center was set up at the 
 in 
. Despite the handicap—caused by the segregation policy—of not having an experienced training cadre as with other AAF units, the 
 distinguished themselves in combat with the 
. The Tuskegee training program produced 673 black fighter pilots, 253 
 pilots, and 132 navigators.
 The vast majority of African-American airmen, however, did not fare as well. Mainly 
, most did not fly or maintain aircraft. Their largely menial duties, indifferent or hostile leadership, and poor morale led to serious dissatisfaction and several violent incidents.


Women served more successfully as part of the war-time Army Air Forces. The AAF was willing to experiment with its allotment from the unpopular 
 (WAACs) and became an early and determined supporter of full military status for women in the Army (
 or WACs). WACs serving in the AAF became such an accepted and valuable part of the service they earned the distinction of being commonly (but unofficially) known as "Air WACs".
 Nearly 40,000 women served in the WAACs and WACs as AAF personnel,
 more than 1,000 as 
 (WASPs), and 6,500 as 
 in the Army Air Forces, including 500 flight nurses.
 7,601 "Air WACs" served overseas in April 1945, and women performed in more than 200 job categories.


The Air Corps Act of July 1926 increased the number of general officers authorized in the Army's air arm from two to four. The activation of GHQAF in March 1935 doubled that number to eight and pre-war expansion of the Air Corps in October 1940 saw fifteen new general officer billets created.
 By the end of World War II, 320 generals were authorized for service within the wartime AAF.


The Air Corps operated 156 installations at the beginning of 1941. An airbase expansion program had been underway since 1939, attempting to keep pace with the increase in personnel, units, and aircraft, using existing municipal and private facilities where possible, but it had been mismanaged, first by the 
 and then by the 
, because of a lack of familiarity with Air Corps requirements.
 The outbreak of war in Europe and the resulting need for a wide variety of facilities for both operations and training within the Continental United States necessitated comprehensive changes of policy, first in September 1941 by giving the responsibility for acquisition and development of bases directly to the AAF for the first time in its history,
 and then in April 1942 by delegation of the enormous task by Headquarters AAF to its user field commands and numbered air forces.


In addition to the construction of new permanent bases and the building of numerous bombing and gunnery ranges, the AAF utilized civilian pilot schools, training courses conducted at college and factory sites, and officer training detachments at colleges. In early 1942, in a controversial move, the AAF Technical Training Command began leasing resort hotels and apartment buildings for large-scale training sites (accommodation for 90,000 existed in Miami Beach alone).
 The 
 were negotiated for the AAF by the Corps of Engineers, often to the economic detriment of hotel owners in rental rates, wear and tear clauses, and short-notice to terminate leases.


In December 1943, the AAF reached a war-time peak of 783 airfields in the Continental United States.
 At the end of the war, the AAF was using almost 20 million acres of land, an area as large as 
, 
, 
, and 
 combined.


By the end of World War II, the USAAF had created 16 
 (
 through 
 and 
) distributed worldwide to prosecute the war, plus a general air force within the continental United States to support the whole and provide air defense.
 The latter was formally organized as the 
 and activated on 15 December 1944, although it did not formally take jurisdiction of its component air forces until the end of the war in Europe.


Half of the numbered air forces were created 
 as the service expanded during the war. Some grew out of earlier commands as the service expanded in size and hierarchy (for example, the 
 became the 
 in April 1942),
 and higher echelons such as 
 (USSTAF) in Europe
 and 
 became necessary to control the whole.

A subordinate organizational tier within the numbered air force, the 
, was created to segregate units of similar functions (fighters and bombers) for administrative control. The numbering of the operational command was designated by the Roman numeral of its parent numbered air force. For instance, the Eighth Air Force listed the VIII Bomber Command and the 
 as subordinate operational commands. Roman numbered commands within numbered air forces also included "support", "base", and other services commands to support the operational units, such as the VIII Air Force Service and VIII Air Force Composite Commands
 also part of Eighth Air Force during its history. The use of Roman-numeral commands was nonstandard within the AAF; the 
, 
, and 
 did not field subordinate commands during World War II.


Eight 
 served as an additional layer of 
 for the vast organization, capable of acting independently if the need arose.

Inclusive within the air forces, commands and divisions were administrative headquarters called 
 to control 
 (operational units; see section below). As the number of groups increased, the number of wings needed to control them multiplied, with 91 ultimately activated, 69 of which were still active at the end of the war. As part of the Air Service and Air Corps, wings had been composite organizations, that is, composed of groups with different types of missions. Most of the wings of World War II, however, were composed of groups with like functions (denoted as 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
).


The six 
 organized between March 1941 and April 1942 to support and supply the numbered air forces remained on the same 
 echelon as the numbered air forces, under the direct control of Headquarters Army Air Forces. At the end of 1942 and again in the spring of 1943 the AAF listed nine support commands before it began a process of consolidation that streamlined the number to five at the end of the war.


These commands were:

The primary combat unit of the Army Air Forces for both administrative and tactical purposes was the 
, an organization of three or four flying 
 and attached or organic ground support elements, which was the rough equivalent of a 
 of the 
.
 The Army Air Forces fielded a total of 318 combat groups at some point during World War II, with an operational force of 243 combat groups in 1945.


The 
 and its successor the 
 had established 15 permanent combat groups between 1919 and 1937.
 With the buildup of the combat force beginning 1 February 1940, the Air Corps expanded from 15 to 30 groups by the end of the year. On 7 December 1941 the number of activated combat groups had reached 67, with 49 still within the Continental United States. Of the CONUS groups (the "strategic reserve"), 21 were engaged in operational training or still being organized and were unsuitable for deployment.
 Of the 67 combat groups, 26 were classified as bombardment: 13 
 groups (
 and 
), and the rest 
 and 
 groups (
, 
, and 
). The balance of the force included 26 
 groups (renamed 
 in May 1942), 9 
 (renamed 
) groups, and 6 
 (renamed 
 or 
) groups.
 After the operational deployment of the 
 bomber, 
 units were added to the force array.

In the first half of 1942 the Army Air Forces expanded rapidly as the necessity of a much larger air force than planned was immediately realized. Authorization for the total number of combat groups required to fight the war nearly doubled in February to 115. In July it jumped to 224, and a month later to 273. When the U.S. entered the war, however, the number of groups actually trained to a standard of combat proficiency had barely surpassed the total originally authorized by the first expansion program in 1940.
 The extant training establishment, in essence a "self-training" system, was inadequate in assets, organization, and 
 to train units wholesale. Individual training of freshly minted pilots occupied an inordinate amount of the available time to the detriment of unit proficiency. The ever-increasing numbers of new groups being formed had a deleterious effect on operational training and threatened to overwhelm the capacity of the old Air Corps groups to provide experienced cadres or to absorb graduates of the expanded training program to replace those transferred. Since 1939 the overall level of experience among the combat groups had fallen to such an extent that when the demand for replacements in combat was factored in, the entire operational training system was threatened.


To avoid this probable crisis, an Operational Training Unit (OTU) system was adopted as it had been by the RAF. Under the American OTU concept, certain experienced groups were authorized as overstrength "parent" groups. A parent group (OTU unit) provided approximately 20% of its seasoned personnel as cadre to a newly activated, or "satellite", group. Cadres detached to the newly activated satellite group were first provided with special instruction on their training responsibilities, initially by the responsible air forces, but after 9 October 1942, by the 
 (AAFSAT) to standardize curriculum and instruction.
 New graduates of training schools fleshed out the satellite group and also restored the parent group to its overstrength size. The parent group was responsible for the organization and training of its satellite, normally a process six months in length that began the day of detachment of the cadre, the first half of the process bringing the new unit up to strength, the second half devoted to flying training, with the final six weeks concentrating on fighting as a unit.


The plan was first adopted in February 1942 by the AFCC's 
 and 
, which had only training responsibilities during World War II.
 The creation of an "operating staff" on 9 March 1942 reorganization of the AAF and the dissolution of the AFCC halted the planned establishment of an Operational Training Command to oversee the program. Spaatz, last commanding general of the AFCC, was temporarily given supervisory responsibility for OTU while the new directorates were brought up to speed,
 but after April 1942 the sub-directorates having jurisdiction over the training
 tended to tell the air forces not only what to do, but how to do it. When the operating staff and its directorates were abolished in March 1943, control of OTU/RTU activities was placed under the 
 and administered by the 
.


In May 1942 the plan was extended to all four continental air forces but not until early 1943 were most developmental problems resolved.
 Before the system matured, each air force became predominant in one type of OTU training, heavy bomber in the Second Air Force, medium and light bomber in the Third, and fighters in the 
 and 
 (which also had an air defense responsibility), but eventually both fighter and bombardment OTU were conducted in all four. When the bulk of new groups (and several parent groups) had been sent overseas, replacement training (RTU)
 took precedence over OTU and except for three B-29 groups,
 no new satellites were formed after October 1943.
 In December 1943, 56 groups were assigned to the strategic reserve as OTU parent units or RTUs,
 and the AAF had reached its maximum size, 269 groups. 136 were deployed overseas and of those still in the United States, 77 were also being organized and trained for overseas deployment. In the spring of 1944 all operational and replacement training was reassigned to "base units" of the respective CONUS air forces,
 resulting in the inactivation or disbanding between 31 March and 1 May 1944 of 49 OTU/RTU groups, which reduced the number of active groups to 218. However, additional groups were formed in the following months to bring the AAF to its final wartime structure.


In February 1945 the AAF fielded 243 combat groups:

Between the 
 in June 1944 and 
 in 1945, 149 combat groups fought against Germany, while by August 1945, when all combat operations ended, 86 groups were deployed in the Pacific and Far East. The European force was then either performing occupation duties or re-deploying to the United States.
 With the partial demobilization of the forces in Europe, the total of active groups in the AAF had been reduced to 213. Nearly all of the discontinued units were heavy bombardment groups (B-17 and B-24), which numbered only 35 at the war's end. The remainder had been inactivated or redesignated as very heavy bombardment (B-29).


The basic permanent organization of the AAF for combat elements was the squadron.
 1,226 combat squadrons were active in the USAAF between 7 December 1941 and 2 September 1945.
 At the end of hostilities in 1945 a total of 933 squadrons remained active, with 868 assigned to the various groups. 65 squadrons, mostly 
 and 
, were not assigned to groups but as separate units under higher command echelons.


The United States Army Air Forces used a large variety of aircraft in accomplishing its various missions, including many obsolete aircraft left over from its pre-June 1941 time as the Air Corps, with fifteen designations of types.


The following were the most numerous types in the USAAF inventory, or those that specifically saw combat. Variants, including all photo-reconnaissance ("F") variants, are listed and described under their separate articles. Many aircraft, particularly transports and trainers, had numerous designations resulting from differences in power plants.



On 13 August 1941, the 
 of the USAAF produced its plan for a global air strategy, AWPD/1.
 Formally known as "Annex 2, Air Requirements" to "The Victory Program", a plan of strategic estimates involving the entire U.S. military,
 the plan was prepared in accordance with strategic policies drawn earlier that year in the 
 agreement with the 
 and the U.S. war plan 
. Its forecast figures, despite planning errors from lack of accurate information about weather and the German economic commitment to the war, were within 2 percent of the units and 5.5 percent of the personnel ultimately mobilized,
 and it accurately predicted the time frame when 
 would take place.


AWPD/1 called for an air defense of the Western hemisphere, a strategic defense against Japan in the Pacific, and strategic bombardment by 6,800 bombers against Germany, identifying 154 key targets of the German economic infrastructure it considered vulnerable to a sustained campaign.
 A strategic bomber requirement of 7,500 aircraft, which included the intercontinental 
 (then still in the design phase), was far too large for American industry to achieve to be practical, and an interim plan to attack Germany with 3,800 bombers was included in AWPD/1.


AWPD/1 was approved by Marshall and 
 
 in September 1941.
 Although war began before the plan could be presented to Roosevelt, it became the foundation for establishing aircraft production and training requirements used during the war, and the concept of a strategic bomber offensive against Germany became policy of the U.S. government,
 in accordance with United States strategic policy stated in 
, as the only means available to the United States to take the war to Germany.


In August 1942 Roosevelt called for a revision of proposed air requirements. AWPD/42 was presented on 6 September 1942, and although never accepted by the U.S. Navy, its revised estimates (which more than doubled production requirements to nearly 150,000 aircraft of all types, including those of the Navy and exports to allies) guided the Roosevelt Administration in 1943. The estimate was later reduced to 127,000, of which 80,000 were combat aircraft.

Like its predecessor, AWPD/42 laid out a strategic plan for the daylight bombing of Germany by unescorted heavy bombers, but also included a similar plan for attacks on Japan. Unfortunately the B-17 bomber command of the U.S. 
 had only flown six relatively unopposed missions when AWPD/42 was drawn up, and the prior mistake in AWPD/1 of disregarding the need and feasibility of long-range fighter escorts was repeated.

Both plans called for the destruction of the German Air Force (GAF) as a necessary requirement before campaigns against priority economic targets. AWPD/1 established four target sets in order of priority: electrical power production, inland transportation, petroleum production, and Berlin;
 while AWPD/42 revised the priorities, placing 
 facilities first, followed by transportation, electricity production, petroleum production, and rubber production.


To prevent or alleviate the effects of 
, the AAF developed policies for rotating combat crews between the theaters of operations and the United States.
 Replacement limitations and operational requirements caused the modification of basic AAF policy several times during the war. On 1 July 1942 the War Department first set a one-year tour of duty for all AAF combat crews, but a simple, uniform policy service-wide was unrealistic and never put into effect. Instead field commanders developed their own criteria for determining completion of tours. While varying substantially between theaters, most of these programs attempted to establish fixed tours based on numbers of missions and other quantifiable factors. Nonetheless, Headquarters AAF did not interfere with theater programs but did prohibit any rotation unless replacements had first arrived in the unit.
 After studying the situation, the War Department rescinded the one-year tour policy on 29 May 1943 and changed procedures for assignment of replacements to include both attrition and rotation purposes. However a continuing shortage forced commanders to lengthen the tours they had established, to the detriment of aircrew morale.


By January 1944 nearly all active tactical units had been programmed for deployment and the overall loss rate in the AAF was less than predicted. Arnold began to build reserves in tactical units to provide enough personnel for multiple crews for each aircraft but was hampered by the rotation policies, particularly among those fighting in Europe. Rotated personnel also believed that they were permanently exempt from further combat service, which was never the case at any time during World War II.
 He ordered the revocation on 16 February 1944 of policies that arbitrarily set fixed "goals" for completion of combat tours and directed that the impression that no airman would be required to serve more than one tour of combat be "unmistakably corrected".


The use of in-theater rest camps as a short term measure for relief of stress only served to delay the onset of combat fatigue. The AAF approved in April 1944 the use of 30 days leave in the United States on a limited basis as a substitute for rotation but by August found it counterproductive for rehabilitative purposes.
 In September 1944 Arnold, without rescinding his "no fixed tours" order, notified field commands that his objective was to provide enough replacement crews that rotation "based on war weariness" became unnecessary. This resulted in a revision of rotation policies whose "guidelines" had the effect of again setting fixed limits for a tour of duty for the remainder of the war.


The Air Force Historical Studies Office summarizes the execution of USAAF strategy during World War II:



"Arnold's staff made the first priority in the war to launch a strategic bombing offensive in support of the 
 against Germany. The Eighth Air Force, sent to England in 1942, took on that job. After a slow and often costly effort to bring the necessary strength to bear, joined in 1944 by the 
 stationed in Italy, strategic bombing finally began to get results, and by the end of the war, the German economy had been dispersed and pounded to rubble.
"Tactical air forces supported the ground forces in the 
 and 
, where the enemy found Allied 
 a constant frustration. In the war against Japan, General 
 made his advance along 
 by 
 his air forces forward and using 
 forces to open up new bases. The AAF also supported Admiral 
's 
 in their island-hopping across the 
 and assisted Allied forces in 
 and China.
"Arnold directly controlled the 
, equipped with the new long-range B-29 Superfortresses used for bombing Japan's 
, first from China and then from the 
. Devastated by 
, Japan was so weakened by August 1945 that Arnold believed neither the 
 nor the planned 
 would be necessary to win the war. The fact that AAF B-29s 
 on 
 and 
, nevertheless, demonstrated what air power could do in the future. The 
 provided ammunition for the leaders of the AAF in the postwar debates over armed forces unification and national strategy."
The United States Army Air Forces incurred 12% of the Army's 936,000 battle casualties in World War II. 88,119 airmen died in service. 52,173 were battle casualty deaths: 45,520 
, 1,140 died of wounds, 3,603 were 
 and declared dead, and 1,910 were non-hostile battle deaths. Of the United States military and naval services, only the Army Ground Forces suffered more battle deaths. 35,946 non-battle deaths included 25,844 in aircraft accidents, more than half of which occurred within the Continental United States.
 63,209 members of the USAAF were other battle casualties. 18,364 were 
 and required medical evacuation, and 41,057 became 
.
 Its casualties were 5.1% of its strength, compared to 10% for the rest of the Army.


Total aircraft losses for the AAF from December 1941 to August 1945 were 65,164, with 43,581 lost overseas and 21,583 within the Continental United States.
 Combat losses of aircraft totaled 22,948 worldwide, with 18,418 lost in theaters fighting Germany and 4,530 lost in combat in the Pacific.
 The AAF credited its own forces with destroying a total of 40,259 aircraft of opposing nations by all means, 29,916 against Germany and its allies and 10,343 in the Pacific.


The cost of the war to the AAF was approximately $50 billion,
 or about 30% of the cost to the War Department,
 with cash expenditures from direct appropriations between July 1942 and August 1945 amounting to $35,185,548,000.


Total 
 flown by the AAF during World War II were 2,352,800, with 1,693,565 flown in Europe-related areas and 669,235 flown in the Pacific and Far East.


36 members of the Army Air Forces received the 
 for actions performed during air missions, 22 of them posthumously. Two additional awards were made, one posthumously, to AAF officers attached to the Western Task Force during 
.

With the defeat of Japan, the entire United States military establishment immediately began a drastic 
, as it had at the end of World War I. The AAF was hit as hard or harder as the older services by demobilization. Officers and enlisted were discharged, installations were closed, and aircraft were stored or sold. Between August 1945 and April 1946, its strength fell from 2.25 million men to just 485,000, and a year later to 304,000. The 
, which retained its mission to support the entire military establishment worldwide, was trimmed from nine to three divisions and by the end of 1946 its personnel reduced by 80%. Aircraft inventory dropped from 79,000 to less than 30,000, many of them in storage. Permanent installations were reduced from 783 to 177, just 21 more than pre-war.


By July 1946, the Army Air Forces had only 2 combat-ready groups out of 52 that remained on the list of active units. A rebuilt air force of 70 groups, the authorized peacetime strength, was anticipated, with reserve and national guard forces to be available for active duty in an emergency. However considerable opposition to a large peacetime military establishment, and to the financial cost of such an establishment, resulted in planning cuts to 48 groups.

In February 1946, ill health forced the retirement of Arnold before he could fulfill his goal of achieving independence of the Air Force as a service equal with the Army and Navy. Spaatz replaced Arnold as the only other commanding general of the USAAF, and he oversaw both the demobilization of the largest air force in military history and its rebirth as envisioned by Mitchell and Arnold.

Arnold left the AAF with two important legacies, based on his experiences in World War II, which shaped the post-war USAAF and their independent successor. The first was a requirement that the command staff of the service must include 
 of varying expertise besides pilots. The second was the belief that despite the unqualified success of training methods that had expanded the Air Forces, the United States would never again have the time to mobilize and train the 
 as they had in 1940, necessitating that reservists and National Guardsmen be immediately ready for service in case of national emergency.


For his part, Spaatz consulted closely with the new Army Chief of Staff, General 
, and reorganized the AAF into 
 including three for combat operations (
, 
, and 
)
 that would not require a second restructuring once the Air Force became independent.
 He also re-structured the reserve components to conform with Arnold's concepts, including creation of the 
 in April 1946.


In such a manner for the first time in the history of American aviation the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces definitely took a stand in favor of an independent military air arm. Though far from providing the initial impulse, 
's message of 19 December 1945 contributed considerable impetus to a series of developments within the executive and legislative branches of the government which led directly, if belatedly, to the adoption of the National Security Act of 1947. —R. Earl McClendon, 


On 11 April 1945, at the conclusion of a ten-month study that took them to every major theater to interview 80 "key military and naval personnel", the Joint Chiefs of Staff Special Committee for the Reorganization of National Defense recommended that the armed forces of United States be organized into a single cabinet department, and that "three coordinate combat branches, Army, Navy, and Air" comprise the operational services. The committee reported that the statutory creation of a United States Air Force would merely recognize a situation that had evolved during World War II with the Army Air Forces, acknowledging that naval/marine aviation and some aspects of army aviation would remain in place. The committee also reported that its recommendation was approved by "Generals of the Army Douglas MacArthur and Dwight D. Eisenhower, Fleet Admirals Chester W. Nimitz and William F. Halsey and numerous other leading military and naval personnel".


The Navy Department remained opposed to a single department of defense and, at the recommendation of the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Naval Affairs, created a panel using naval personnel to study the feasibility of a coordinating agency without executive powers as an alternative. The "Eberstadt report" made such a recommendation, but also endorsed the concept of an Air Force as a separate service. The Navy Department did not acknowledge its own findings and continued to oppose creation of a separate Air Force during hearings for unification bills introduced in October 1945. When the hearings failed to submit a report, President 
 on 19 December 1945 came out strongly in support of an air force on a parity with ground and naval forces, reminding Congress that prior to the war independent Army and Navy Departments had often failed to work collectively or in coordination to the best interest of the nation. He asserted that wartime expedients that had overcome these defects proved to be the difference between victory and defeat.


Congress, at the recommendation of Truman, created the 
 with enactment of the National Security Act of 1947 (61 
. 495), 26 July 1947. The act established the 
, a completely separate branch of the U.S. military, and abolished both the Army Air Forces and the Air Corps, effective 18 September 1947.
 The transfer of personnel and assets from the AAF to the USAF was effected by Transfer Order 1, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 26 September 1947.


The initial delineation of service roles, Executive Order 9877, was supplanted on 21 April 1948, by the approval by Truman of the 
, which outlined the air assets that each service would be permitted to maintain. The Air Force was assigned the bulk of strategic, tactical, and transport aircraft, but the issue remained divisive well into the 1950s.


The 
, the official history of the AAF, summarized its significance as the final step to independence for the Air Force:

By the close of the war (the AAF) had emerged as virtually a third independent service. Officially, the AAF never became anything other than a subordinate agency of the War Department charged to organize, train, and equip air units for assignment to combat theaters. Its jurisdiction was wholly limited to the Zone of Interior 
, and it could communicate with air organizations in combat theaters only through channels extending up to the Chief of Staff, and then down through the theater commander to his subordinate air commander. The position of the AAF, in other words, was no different from that of the Army Ground Forces and the Army Service Forces, the other two of the three coordinate branches into which the Army had been divided. So, at any rate, read the regulations.
Actually, the Commanding General, Army Air Forces ... functioned on a level parallel to that of the Chief of Staff. ... He moved at the very highest levels of command in the wartime coalition with Britain. He chose the commanders of the combat air forces. ... He communicated regularly (with the air commanders overseas). ... He exerted a powerful influence on the development of strategy, tactics, and doctrine wherever AAF units fought. ... A world-wide system of air transport moved at his command through all theaters, (denying their) commanders their traditional prerogative of controlling everything within their area of responsibility. Throughout the war (he ran) the air war in whatever part of the world there seemed to be need for attention by Headquarters. The contrast between theory and fact is...fundamental to an understanding of the AAF.
USAAF uniforms for all members consisted of a winter service uniform of 
 wool worn in temperate weather and a tropical weather summer service uniform of 
 cotton the same as those of other U.S. Army forces. In addition to the service uniforms usually worn for dress purposes and on pass from posts there were a variety of fatigue and flying uniforms. Summer and winter service uniforms were both worn throughout the year in the continental U.S. During World War II the European theater of operations was considered a year-round temperate uniform zone and the Pacific theater of operations a year-round tropical uniform zone.


The issue enlisted men's winter service uniform consisted of a four pocket coat and trousers in olive drab shade 33 (light shade) 16 oz wool 
. Shirts with two patch pockets and without shoulder straps were either 8.2 oz 
 khaki, a light tan, shade No. 1, or 10.5 oz olive drab wool light shade No. 33. Either shirt could be worn under the coat; however, the cotton shirt could not be worn as an outer garment with the wool trousers.
 The wool necktie for the winter uniform was black and the summer necktie was khaki cotton, originally.
 In February 1942 a universal mohair wool necktie in olive drab shade 3 and cotton blend khaki shade 5 were authorized for both uniforms.
 An overcoat of OD shade 33 
 was worn in cold weather. The enlisted man's summer service uniform consisted of the same cotton khaki shade No. 1 uniform shirt with matching trousers; the coat for this uniform stopped being issued in the 1930s. Whenever the shirt was worn as an outer garment the necktie was tucked between the second and third button of the shirt.


The male officer's winter service uniform consisted of a coat of finer wool fabric in olive drab shade No. 51 (dark-shade) with a fabric belt matching the coat, nicknamed "greens". Officers could wear trousers matching the color and fabric of the coat, or optionally they were allowed taupe colored, officially called "drab shade 54", trousers of the same material as the coat, nicknamed "pinks", leading to the nickname "pinks and greens" for the iconic combination.
 Officers were also authorized to use the more durable olive drab shade 33 serge uniforms, except for the enlisted men's four pocket service coat, as long as they were not mixed with OD Shade 51 or Drab Shade 54 clothing.
 An officer's OD overcoat and taupe rain coat were also authorized. Officers wore same cotton khaki shade No. 1 or olive drab wool light shade No. 33 shirts as enlisted men except with the addition of shoulder straps. Officers also had additional shirt color and fabric options, OD dark shade No. 50 or No. 51 and in 1944 drab shade No. 54.


Officers wore black and khaki neckties until after February 1942 when neckties of wool cotton blend khaki shade 5 were authorized.
 Male officer's summer service uniforms usually consisted of the wash-and-wear cotton khaki shade 1 uniforms like those of the enlisted men, the main difference being that the shirts had shoulder straps. An OD wool shirt and cotton khaki trouser combination was also authorized. However, for dress purposes they also had the option of purchasing a khaki shade 1 summer service uniform of tropical weight suiting fabric. This uniform was identical in cut to the winter officers' uniform except for the color and cloth. However, the cloth belt of the winter coat was omitted.


Personnel stationed in Europe, and after 1944 in the U.S., were authorized to wear a wool waist-length jacket, in either OD Shade 51 (for officers only) or OD Shade 33, nicknamed the 
 and eventually standardized as the M-1944 Field Jacket, in lieu of the full-length tunic of the service dress uniform.


Headgear for service uniforms consisted of two types, similar to those in use in the Army's ground forces, in olive drab for winter wear and khaki for summer. The 
, commonly called the "flight cap" in the air forces, had been authorized for all ranks since 1926 to facilitate the wearing of radio headsets during flights. The "curtain" had piping for enlisted men in the USAAF branch colors of orange and ultramarine blue. The caps of 
 were piped with black and silver cord; commissioned officers had black and gold piping except for general officer caps, which used gold cord.
 The oval 
 was fitted with a spring stiffening device called a 
, and prior to World War II uniform regulations authorized officers to remove the grommet to permit the use of headsets. This style became widely popular during World War II as a symbol of being a combat veteran, and was known as a "50-mission crush" cap.
 The service cap however was no longer generally issued to enlisted men after 1942.


Leather items, including shoes, were 
 in color, and the AAF became known as the "Brown Shoe Air Force" after the United States Air Force became a separate service.


Female USAAF uniforms were either the uniform of the 
 (ANC) or that of the 
 (WAAC) with appropriate USAAF branch insignia. In the summer of 1943 the 
 (WAC) replaced the WAAC. Although female auxiliary organizations such as the WAAC, 
 (WAFS) and 
 (WASP) performed valuable service to the AAF, only the ANC and the WAC were official members of the U.S. Armed Forces. In the AAF servicewomen became unofficially known as "Air WACs".


Nurses attached to the AAF wore Army hospital whites, or prior to 1943, the ANC winter service uniform consisting of the ANC pattern dark blue cap or garrison cap with maroon piping, suit jacket with maroon cuff braid and gold army buttons, light blue or white shirt, black tie and light blue skirt, shoes were black or white. The ANC summer service uniform consisted of a similar suit in beige with maroon shoulder strap piping and cuff braid, beige ANC cap or beige garrison cap with maroon piping, white shirt, and black four-in-hand tie. During World War II the first flight nurses uniform consisted of a blue wool battle dress jacket, blue wool trousers and a blue wool men's style maroon piped garrison cap. The uniform was worn with either the ANC light blue or white shirt and black tie. After 1943 the ANC adopted olive drab service uniforms similar to the newly formed WAC.


Female service dress went through an evolution of patterns over the course of the war years, however throughout the period the service uniforms both summer and winter generally consisted of the WAC pattern hat or women's garrison cap, suit coat (winter only for enlisted women), shirtwaist, four-in-hand tie, skirt, russet leather women's service shoes and hand bag. The women's olive drab wool "Ike jacket" was also worn as were women's service trousers. The colors essentially mirrored those of their male counterparts of corresponding rank in the equivalent service uniform although fabrics differed. There were also special off duty dresses of summer beige and winter tan. The new olive drab ANC uniforms were the same as those for WAC officers except for the ANC pattern hat and the ANC pattern handbag. The off duty dress was a separate ANC pattern in olive drab shade 51 or beige. The ANC beige summer service uniform with maroon trim was retained except that the tie was changed to maroon.
 Sage green fatigue uniforms of 
 cotton 
 for women, along with women's combat boots, field jackets and flight clothing, were manufactured by the U.S. Army during World War II. However, when women's versions of these items were not available, as was often the case during the war, men's issue items were used instead.

Flight clothing varied widely by 
 and type of mission. Innovative aviation flight suits, boots, leather helmets, goggles, and gloves were issued as early as 1928 to the Air Corps, and at least one style, the Type A-3 flight suit, continued in service until 1944.
 However, 
, made standard issue on 9 May 1931, became one of the best known symbols of the AAF. Made of 
 horsehide leather (later supplemented by goatskin) with a beige 
 lining (cotton after 1939), the jackets featured an officer's stand-up collar, 
, knit waistbands and cuffs, a zipper closing, and unit insignia.
 Heavy, sheepskin-lined B-3 and B-6 
, A-3 winter flying trousers, and B-2 "gunner's" caps, all in seal brown 
, proved insufficient for the extreme cold temperatures of high altitude missions in unpressurized aircraft, and were supplemented by a variety of one-piece electrically heated flying suits manufactured by 
. In addition to men's flight clothing, flight nurses wore specially manufactured women's lightweight and intermediate weight flight jackets and pants.
 Flight clothing such as the A-2 jacket was not authorized to be worn off the camp or post unless required for flight duty.
 The same sage green fatigue uniforms of herringbone cotton twill, and wind-resistant 
 field jackets used by Army ground troops, were also worn by AAF troops depending on duty assignment.


In early 1943 the AAF did not renew its contracts for leather flight garments and began production of flight jackets and flying trousers made of cotton twill and 
 blends with 
 pile linings. The AAF standardized the sage green or light olive drab B-10 flight jacket on 22 July 1943, accompanied by matching A-9 flying trousers with built-in suspenders, and the combination became widespread in the Eighth Air Force by early 1944. The heavier B-15 jacket followed at the end of the year, with the A-11 trousers issued in the last months of the war. Most jackets featured a 
 or shearling collar, but a popular variation known as the "tanker jacket" had a wool knit collar that was less confining. These new jackets were lighter in weight than their leather predecessors while just as warm. Hooded variants designated B-9 and B-11 also appeared in early 1944 but because they were bulky and their fur-lined hoods impractical in combat, these were worn primarily by noncombat personnel or during ground duties.

AAF uniforms were subject to Army Regulations, specifically AR 600-35 and AR 600–40, authorizing the wearing of badges, insignia, and emblems on the uniform. The vast size of the service saw the wearing of many custom-made variants of authorized badges, insignia, and emblems, and numerous examples of unauthorized insignia and emblems appeared throughout the forces, particularly in combat units overseas.

To denote the special training and qualifications required for air crew and technical personnel in the USAAF, in most categories known as being 
, the following 
 (known familiarly but ubiquitously throughout the service as "wings") were authorized for wear by members of the Army Air Forces:


These aviation qualification badges were typically worn in full three-inch (76 mm) size on service or dress uniforms, but two-inch versions (nicknamed "sweetheart wings") were also authorized for less-formal shirt wear. Most aviation badges were made of sterling silver or were given a silver finish, and various devices were used to attach them to uniforms. These included the traditional pin and safety catch and, later, clutch-back fasteners. Most USAAF badges of World War II became obsolete, having been superseded by later designs or with their aeronautical rating discontinued, and were not authorized for wear on the uniform after 1955.

In order to recognize and differentiate combat aircrews from other airmen in Europe, on 29 March 1943 the European Theater Headquarters of the U.S. Army created an ultramarine blue cloth patch 1" × 3.25" to be sewn on the service coat behind the aviation badge. According to General Order 18 Hq ETOUSA the patch was to be worn by personnel of the Army Air Forces who held currently effective aeronautical ratings or who were authorized to wear the aviation badge for air crew members, during the time such personnel were currently assigned to combat flight duty. The patch was to be promptly removed when the individual ceased to serve in such capacity or left the theater.


The rank structure and insignia of the U.S. Army Air Forces was that of the United States Army of World War II.

The first 
 authorized for Air Corps wear was that of the General Headquarters Air Force, approved 20 July 1937.
 This sleeve insignia, which consisted of a blue 
 superimposed on a gold circle, was retained after GHQ Air Force became Air Force Combat Command on 20 June 1941. The triskelion represented a stylized propeller that symbolized the three combat wings of GHQ Air Force.
 On 23 February 1942, the GHQ AF patch was discontinued and the service-wide AAF sleeve insignia ("Hap Arnold Emblem") approved. The patch was designed by a member of Gen. Arnold's staff, James T. Rawls, and was based on the 
 popularized by 
.


The wearing of sleeve insignia was authorized for members of numbered air forces based overseas on 2 March 1943, and for air forces in the United States on 25 June 1943. From that date forward, the "Hap Arnold Emblem" was worn only by personnel of units not assigned to a numbered air force. AR 600–40, "Wearing of the Service Uniform", subsequently limited sleeve insignia to the 16 air forces and the AAF patch. The 
, responsible for the design and supply of all authorized insignia, resisted further designs for the AAF until 28 July 1945, when command arcs (arc-shaped tabs, see example above in 
) were authorized for wear above the AAF insignia by members of the various support commands.


As all 48 states then part of the Union were contained within the 
, the term "Zone of the Interior" for the First through Fourth Air Forces' areas of assignment was the Second World War's term for what is called "CONUS" by today's 
 in the 21st century. 

Northeast United States
(Zone of the Interior)

Northwest United States
(Zone of the Interior)

Southeast United States
(Zone of the Interior)

Western United States
(Zone of the Interior)

Philippines
Australia
Southwest Pacific

Caribbean Islands
Panama
South America

Hawaii
Central Pacific

Europe

Middle East
North Africa
Europe

India
Burma

Alaska

North Africa
Mediterranean

South Pacific

China

Mediterranean

India/China
Mariana Islands


				Pages for logged out editors 

			




 was a Japanese organization advocating the 
 of the 
 and the establishment of a republican form. The full name is 
 (
) meaning Anti-Imperial System National Individuals' Joint Struggle Committee. The group was started in 1987 by a radical group of students at 
 in 
 and 
. They often used street performances to spread their message.


In 1996 members of Aki no Arashi won a lawsuit against the 
 for 
 and battery by 
. The events took place during a series of rallies organized by the group in 1989, after the death of 
.


This article about an organization or organization-related topic in Japan is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.



The 
 (
) is the 
 
 of the 
. It is one of the eight 
, and is designated as the Army of the United States in the 
.
 The oldest and most senior branch of the U.S. military in order of precedence,
 the modern U.S. Army has its roots in the 
, which was formed on 14 June 1775 to fight the 
 (1775–1783)—before the United States was established as a country.
 After the Revolutionary War, the 
 created the United States Army on 3 June 1784 to replace the disbanded Continental Army.
 The United States Army considers itself to be a continuation of the Continental Army, and thus considers its institutional inception to be the origin of that armed force in 1775.


The U.S. Army is a 
 and is part of the 
, which is one of the three military departments of the 
. The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the 
 (SECARMY) and by a chief 
, the 
 (CSA) who is also a member of the 
. It is the largest military branch, and in the 
 2020, the projected end strength for the 
 (USA) was 480,893 soldiers; the 
 (ARNG) had 336,129 soldiers and the 
 (USAR) had 188,703 soldiers; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 1,005,725 soldiers.
 As a branch of the armed forces, the mission of the U.S. Army is "to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of 
".
 The branch participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force of the United States.

The United States Army serves as the land-based branch of the 
. 
 defines the purpose of the army as:


In 2018, the 
 articulated an eight-point addendum to the Army Vision for 2028.
 While the Army Mission remains constant, the Army Strategy builds upon the Army's 
 by adding focus to 
 and 
-level echelons.
 The 
 oversees reforms geared toward 
. The Army's current 
 is due to be completed by 2028.


The Army's five core competencies are prompt and sustained land combat, 
 operations (to include combined arms maneuver and wide–area security, armored and mechanized operations and airborne and air assault operations), 
, to set and sustain the theater for the joint force, and to integrate national, multinational, and joint power on land.


The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the 
 as a unified army for the colonies to fight 
, with 
 appointed as its commander.
 The army was initially led by men who had served in the 
 or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them. As the Revolutionary War progressed, 
 aid, resources and military thinking helped shape the new army. A number of European soldiers came on their own to help, such as 
, who taught 
 tactics and organizational skills.

The Army fought numerous pitched battles, and sometimes used 
 and 
 in the South in 1780 and 1781; Under Major General 
, it hit where the British were weakest to wear down their forces. Washington led victories against the British at 
 and 
, but lost a series of battles in the 
 in 1776 and the 
 in 1777. With a decisive victory at 
 and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.

After the war, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the 
 distrust of standing armies. State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, with the exception of 
 to guard the 
 and one battery of artillery guarding 
's arsenal. However, because of continuing conflict with 
, it was soon realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army. The 
 was at first very small and after General 
 at the Battle of the Wabash,
 where more than 800 Americans were killed, the Regular Army was reorganized as the 
, which was established in 1791 and renamed the United States Army in 1796.

In 1798, during the 
 with France, Congress established a three-year "
" of 10,000 men, consisting of twelve regiments of infantry and six troops of light dragoons. By March 1799 Congress created an "Eventual Army" of 30,000 men, including three regiments of cavalry. Both "armies" existed only on paper, but equipment for 3,000 men and horses was procured and stored.


The 
, the second and last war between the United States and Great Britain, had mixed results.  The U.S. Army did not conquer Canada but it did destroy Native American resistance to expansion in the 
 and it validated its independence by stopping two major British invasions in 1814 and 1815. After 
 in 1813, the U.S. Army seized parts of western Upper Canada, 
 and 
, which caused his 
 to collapse. Following U.S. victories in the Canadian province of Upper Canada, British troops who had dubbed the U.S. Army "Regulars, by God!", were able to capture and 
, which was defended by militia, in 1814. The regular army, however, proved they were professional and capable of defeating the British army during the 
 and 
, prompting British agreement on the previously rejected terms of a 
 antebellum. Two weeks after a treaty was signed (but not ratified), 
 defeated the British in the 
 and 
, and became a national hero. U.S. troops and sailors 
, 
 and 
 in the final engagements of the war. Per the treaty, both sides (the United States and Great Britain) returned to the geographical status quo. Both navies kept the warships they had seized during the conflict.

The army's major campaign against the Indians was fought in 
 against 
. It took long wars (1818–1858) to finally defeat the Seminoles and move them to Oklahoma. The usual strategy in Indian wars was to seize control of the Indians' winter food supply, but that was no use in Florida where there was no winter. The second strategy was to form alliances with other Indian tribes, but that too was useless because the Seminoles had destroyed all the other Indians when they entered Florida in the late eighteenth century.


The U.S. Army fought and won the 
 (1846–1848), which was a defining event for both countries.
 The U.S. victory resulted in acquisition of territory that eventually became all or parts of the states of 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and 
.

The 
 was the costliest war for the U.S. in terms of casualties. After most 
, located in the southern U.S., formed the 
, the 
, led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a large fraction of Southern white manpower. Forces of the United States (the "Union" or "the North") formed the 
, consisting of a small body of regular army units and a large body of volunteer units raised from every state, north and south, except 
.


For the first two years, Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states.
 The Confederates had the advantage of defending a large territory in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems. By 1863, the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River.  In the 
 of 1862–1863, General 
 seized the 
 and cut off the Southwest.  Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had General 
 under siege in Richmond as General 
 captured Atlanta and 
 and 
.  The Confederate capital was abandoned in April 1865 and Lee subsequently surrendered his army at Appomattox Court House. All other Confederate armies surrendered within a few months.

The war remains the deadliest conflict in U.S. history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 men on both sides. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6.4% in 
 and 18% in 
.


Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on the 
. They set up many forts, and engaged in the last of the 
. U.S. Army troops also occupied several Southern states during the 
 to protect 
.

The key battles of the 
 of 1898 were fought by the Navy. Using mostly 
, the U.S. forces defeated 
 in land campaigns in 
 and played the central role in the 
.

Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring 
.
 In 1910, during the 
, the army was deployed to U.S. towns near the border to ensure the safety of lives and property. In 1916, 
, a major rebel leader, attacked 
, prompting a 
 until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918.

The 
 as an "Associated Power" in 1917 on the side of 
, 
, 
, 
 and the other 
. U.S. troops were sent to the 
 and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war. With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.

In 1939, estimates of the Army's strength range between 174,000 and 200,000 soldiers, smaller than that of 
's, which ranked it 17th or 19th in the world in size. General 
 became Army chief of staff in September 1939 and set about expanding and modernizing the Army in preparation for war.


The United States joined 
 in December 1941 after the 
 
. Some 11 million Americans were to serve in various Army operations.
 On the 
, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that landed in French North Africa and 
 and then 
 and later 
. In the June 1944 
 and in the subsequent 
 and defeat of 
, millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role. In 1947, the number of soldiers in the US Army had decreased from eight million in 1945 to 684,000 soldiers and the total number of active divisions had dropped from 89 to 12. The leaders of the Army saw this demobilization as a success. 

In the 
, U.S. Army soldiers participated alongside the 
 in capturing the 
 from Japanese control. Following the 
 surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after World War II, the 
 separated from the army to become the 
 in September 1947. In 1948, the army was 
 by 
 of President 
.

The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation known as the 
. With the outbreak of the 
, concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, 
 and 
, were reactivated under 
 in 1950 and U.S. strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in 
, the 
 and the 
, until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible 
 attack.


During the Cold War, U.S. troops and their allies fought 
 forces in Korea and 
. The Korean War began in June 1950, when the Soviets walked out of a UN Security Council meeting, removing their possible veto. Under a 
 umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of 
 by 
 and later to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and retreats by both sides and the Chinese 
's entry into the war, the 
 returned the peninsula to the status quo in July 1953.

The 
 is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of 
, the unpopularity of the war with the U.S. public and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by U.S. political leaders. While U.S. forces had been stationed in 
 since 1959, in intelligence and advising/training roles, they were not deployed in large numbers until 1965, after the 
. U.S. forces effectively established and maintained control of the "traditional" battlefield, but they struggled to counter the 
 hit and run tactics of the communist 
 and the 
.


During the 1960s, the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the 
 and the 
.
 In 1967, Secretary of Defense 
 decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to eight divisions (one mechanized infantry, two armored, and five infantry), but increased the number of brigades from seven to 18 (one airborne, one armored, two mechanized infantry and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not sit well with the states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base. However, no reduction in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.

The Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army General 
 in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and involved treating the three components of the army – the 
, the 
 and the 
 as a single force.
 General Abrams' intertwining of the three components of the army effectively made extended operations impossible without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and Army Reserve in a predominantly combat support role.
  The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training to specific performance standards driven by the reforms of General 
, the first commander of 
. Following the Camp David Accords that was signed by Egypt, Israel that was brokered by president 
 in 1978, as part of the agreement, both the United States and 
 agreed that there would be a joint military training led by both countries that would usually take place every 2 years, that exercise is known as 
.

The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The 
 of 1986 created 
 bringing the army together with the other four 
 under unified, geographically organized command structures. The army also played a role in the invasions of 
 in 1983 (
) and 
 in 1989 (
).

By 1989 
 and the Cold War was coming to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.
 A number of incentives such as early retirement were used.

In 1990, 
 
 its smaller neighbor, 
, and U.S. land forces quickly deployed to assure the protection of 
. In January 1991 
 commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to 
. The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the 
. Some of the largest tank battles in history were fought during the Gulf war. The 
, 
 and the 
 were tank battles of historical significance.


After Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force Policy,
 but in 2004, 
 scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential ingredient to the successful application of military force".


On 11 September 2001, 53 Army civilians (47 employees and six contractors) and 22 soldiers were among the 125 victims killed in 
 in a 
 when 
 commandeered by five 
 
 slammed into the western side of the building, as part of the 
.
 In response to the 11 September attacks and as part of the 
, U.S. and 
 forces 
 in October 2001, displacing the 
 government. The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied 
 in 2003; it served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations. In the following years, the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to 
, resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S. service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.
 23,813 insurgents were killed in Iraq between 2003 and 2011.


Until 2009, the army's chief modernization plan, its most ambitious since World War II,
 was the 
 program. In 2009, many systems were canceled, and the remaining were swept into the 
.
 By 2017, the Brigade Modernization project was completed and its headquarters, the Brigade Modernization Command, was renamed the Joint Modernization Command, or JMC.
 In response to 
, Army plans were to shrink to 1940 levels,
 although actual Active-Army end-strengths were projected to fall to some 450,000 troops by the end of FY2017.
 From 2016 to 2017, the Army retired hundreds of 
 observation helicopters,
 while retaining its Apache gunships.
 The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15 to $21 billion for FY15 expected in 2014.


By 2017, a task force was formed to address Army modernization,
 which triggered shifts of units: 
, and 
, from within 
 (AMC), and 
, respectively, to a new Army Command (ACOM) in 2018.
 The 
 (AFC), is a peer of FORSCOM, TRADOC, and AMC, the other ACOMs.
 AFC's mission is modernization reform: to design hardware, as well as to work within the acquisition process which defines materiel for AMC. TRADOC's mission is to define the architecture and organization of the Army, and to train and supply soldiers to FORSCOM.
 
 are Futures Command's vehicle for sustainable 
 for the future.
 In order to support the Army's modernization priorities, its FY2020 budget allocated $30 billion for the top six modernization priorities over the next five years.
 The $30 billion came from $8 billion in cost avoidance and $22 billion in terminations.


The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.
 In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent 
 and perform other non-wartime duties such as 
 and construction works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger 
 which were raised independently by various state governments. States also maintained full-time 
 which could also be called into the service of the army.

By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century. During World War I, the "
" was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S. Volunteers.
 It was demobilized at the end of World War I, and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps and the state militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were known as the "
" with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.


In 1941, the "
" was founded to fight World War II. The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the 
. The Army of the United States was re-established for the 
 and 
 and was demobilized upon the suspension of the 
.


Currently, the Army is divided into the 
, the Army Reserve and the 
.
  Some states further maintain 
, as a type of reserve to the National Guard, while all states maintain regulations for 
.
 State militias are both "organized", meaning that they are armed forces usually part of the state defense forces, or "unorganized" simply meaning that all able-bodied males may be eligible to be called into military service.

The U.S. Army is also divided into 
.  Branches include officers, warrant officers, and enlisted Soldiers while functional areas consist of officers who are reclassified from their former branch into a functional area. However, officers continue to wear the 
 of their former branch in most cases, as functional areas do not generally have discrete insignia. Some branches, such as 
, operate similarly to functional areas in that individuals may not join their ranks until having served in another Army branch. Careers in the Army can extend into cross-functional areas for officer,
 warrant officer, enlisted, and civilian personnel.

Before 1933, members of the Army National Guard were considered state militia until they were mobilized into the U.S. Army, typically on the onset of war. Since the 1933 amendment to the 
, all Army National Guard soldiers have held dual status. They serve as National Guardsmen under the authority of the governor of their state or territory and as reserve members of the U.S. Army under the authority of the president, in the Army National Guard of the United States.

Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the 
, peacekeeping in 
, Afghanistan, and the 
.

 
 (HQDA):

Source: U.S. Army organization


See 
 for a detailed treatment of the 
, 
, 
 and the 
 of the Army.

The U.S. Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month – known as 
 or unit training assemblies (UTAs) – and conduct two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army and the Army Reserve are organized under 
, while the National Guard is organized under 
. While the Army National Guard is organized, trained and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors. However, the District of Columbia National Guard reports to the U.S. president, not the district's mayor, even when not federalized. Any or all of the 
 can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.


The U.S. Army is led by a civilian 
, who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority, direction and control of the 
.
 The 
, who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the 
, a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the 
, the secretary of defense and the 
 on operational military matters, under the guidance of the 
 and 
.
 In 1986, the 
 mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the president to the secretary of defense directly to the 
, who have control of all armed forces units in their geographic or function area of responsibility, thus the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components. The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the secretary of defense.


By 2013, the army shifted to six geographical commands that align with the six geographical unified combatant commands (CCMD):

The army also transformed its base unit from 
 to 
. Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division. As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of brigade combat teams are:

In addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades. Combat support brigades include 
 (CAB) brigades, which will come in heavy and light varieties, 
 (artillery) brigades (now transforms to division artillery) and 
. 
 brigades include 
 brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.

The U.S. Army's conventional combat capability currently consists of 11 active divisions and one deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division) as well as several independent maneuver units. 

From 2013 through 2017, the Army sustained organizational and end-strength reductions after several years of 
. In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active brigade combat teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active-duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. Army chief of staff Raymond Odierno projected that the Army was to shrink to "450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve" by 2018.
 However, this plan was scrapped by the incoming Trump administration, with subsequent plans to expand the Army by 16,000 soldiers to a total of 476,000 by October 2017. The National Guard and the Army Reserve will see a smaller expansion.


The Army's maneuver organization was most recently altered by the reorganization of 
 into the 
, transferring the 1st and 4th Brigade Combat Teams of the 
 under a separate operational headquarters to reflect the brigades' distinct, Arctic-oriented mission. As part of the reorganization, the 1–11 (formerly 1–25) Stryker Brigade Combat Team will reorganize as an Infantry Brigade Combat Team.
 Following this transition, the active component BCTs will number 11 Armored brigades, 6 Stryker brigades, and 14 Infantry brigades.

Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve, there are a further eight divisions, 27 brigade combat teams, additional combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer and support battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.

 
 (FORSCOM)



 
 (USASOC):


The Army's Talent Management Task Force (TMTF) has deployed IPPS-A,
 the 
, an app which serves the National Guard, and in 2021 the Army Reserve and Active Army. Soldiers are reminded to update their information using the legacy systems to keep their payroll and personnel information current by December 2021. IPPS-A is the Human Resources system for the Army, is now available for download for Android, or the Apple store.
 It will be used for future promotions and other personnel decisions. Among the changes are:

Below are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently holds the rank of 
, it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.

There are several paths to becoming a 
 including the 
, 
, 
, and 
. Regardless of which road an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers and chaplains are commissioned directly into the Army.

Most army commissioned officers (those who are generalists)
 are promoted based on an "up or out" system. A more flexible talent management process is underway.
 The 
 of 1980 establishes rules for the timing of promotions and limits the number of officers that can serve at any given time.

Army regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of general as "General (last name)" regardless of the number of stars. Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as "Colonel (last name)" and first and second lieutenants as "Lieutenant (last name)".




 are single track, specialty officers with subject matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the 
, but receive their 
 upon promotion to chief warrant officer two (CW2).

By regulation, warrant officers are addressed as "Mr. (last name)" or "Ms. (last name)" by senior officers and as "sir" or "ma'am" by all enlisted personnel.
 However, many personnel address warrant officers as "Chief (last name)" within their units regardless of rank.

Sergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for 
.
 This distinguishes corporals from the more numerous specialists who have the same pay grade but do not exercise leadership responsibilities. Beginning in 2021, all corporals will be required to conduct 
 for the NCO ranks, completing the 
 (BLC), or else be laterally assigned as specialists. Specialists who have completed BLC and who have been recommended for promotion will be permitted to wear corporal rank before their recommended promotion as NCOs.


Privates and privates first class (E3) are addressed as "Private (last name)", specialists as "Specialist (last name)", corporals as "Corporal (last name)" and sergeants, staff sergeants, sergeants first class and master sergeants all as "Sergeant (last name)". First sergeants are addressed as "First Sergeant (last name)" and sergeants major and command sergeants major are addressed as "Sergeant Major (last name)".


Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories – individual and collective. Because of COVID-19 precautions, the first two weeks of 
 — not including processing and out-processing – incorporate social distancing and indoor desk-oriented training. Once the recruits have tested negative for COVID-19 for two weeks, the remaining 8 weeks follow the traditional activities for most recruits,
 followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their 
. Some individual's MOSs range anywhere from 14 to 20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length of AIT school varies by the MOS. The length of time spent in AIT depends on the MOS of the soldier. Certain highly technical MOS training requires many months (e.g., foreign language translators). Depending on the needs of the army, 
 for combat arms soldiers is conducted at a number of locations, but two of the longest-running are the Armor School and the 
, both at 
, Georgia. Sergeant Major of the Army Dailey notes that an infantrymen's pilot program for 
 (OSUT) extends 8 weeks beyond Basic Training and AIT, to 22 weeks. The pilot, designed to boost infantry readiness ended in December 2018. The new Infantry OSUT covered the 
 machine gun as well as the 
.
 The redesigned Infantry OSUT started in 2019.
 Depending on the result of the 2018 pilot, OSUTs could also extend training in other combat arms beyond the infantry.
 One Station Unit Training will be extended to 22 weeks for Armor by Fiscal Year 2021.
 Additional OSUTs are expanding to Cavalry, Engineer, and Military Police (MP) in the succeeding Fiscal Years.


A new training assignment for junior officers was instituted, that they serve as platoon leaders for Basic Combat Training (BCT) platoons.
 These lieutenants will assume many of the administrative, logistical, and day-to-day tasks formerly performed by the drill sergeants of those platoons and are expected to "lead, train, and assist with maintaining and enhancing the morale, welfare and readiness" of the drill sergeants and their BCT platoons.
 These lieutenants are also expected to stem any inappropriate behaviors they witness in their platoons, to free up the drill sergeants for training.


The 
 (ACFT) was introduced in 2018 to 60 battalions spread throughout the Army.
 The test and scoring system is the same for all soldiers, regardless of gender.  It takes an hour to complete, including resting periods.
 The ACFT supersedes the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT),
 as being more relevant to survival in combat.
 Six events were determined to better predict which muscle groups of the body were adequately conditioned for combat actions:
 three deadlifts,
 a standing power throw of a ten-pound medicine ball,
 hand-release pushups
 (which replace the traditional pushup), a sprint/drag/carry 250 yard event,
 three pull-ups with leg tucks (or a plank test in lieu of the leg tuck),
 a mandatory rest period, and a two-mile run.
 As of 1 October 2020 all soldiers from all three components (Regular Army, Reserve, and National Guard)
 are subject to this test.
 The ACFT now tests all soldiers in basic training as of October 2020. The ACFT became the official test of record 1 October 2020; before that day every Army unit was required to complete a diagnostic ACFT
 (All Soldiers with valid APFT scores can use them until March 2022. The Holistic Health and Fitness (H2F) System is one way that soldiers can prepare.).
 The ACFT movements directly translate to movements on the battlefield.


Following their basic and advanced training at the individual level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier" (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide-ranging MOS and focus it on a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, training includes pre-commissioning training, known as Basic Officer Leader Course A, either at 
 or via 
, or by completing 
. After commissioning, officers undergo branch-specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course B, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according to their future assignments. Officers will continue to attend standardized training at different stages of their careers.


Collective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the 
 (NTC) at 
, California, the 
 (JRTC) at 
, Louisiana and the 
 (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in 
,
 Germany. 
 is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2020 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment, at unit level and for other echelons as required by the mission. Individual-level replenishment still requires training at a unit level, which is conducted at the continental U.S. (CONUS) replacement center (CRC) at 
, in New Mexico and Texas before their individual deployment.


Chief of Staff Milley notes that the Army is suboptimized for training in cold-weather regions, jungles, mountains, or urban areas where in contrast the Army does well when training for deserts or rolling terrain.
 Post 9/11, Army unit-level training was for counter-insurgency (COIN); by 2014–2017, training had shifted to decisive action training.


The 
 has identified six modernization priorities, in order: artillery, ground vehicles, aircraft, network, air/missile defense, and soldier lethality.


The United States Army employs various weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges. The most common weapon type used by the army is the 
, a compact variant of the 
,
 along with the 7.62×51mm variant of the 
 for 
. The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the 9 mm 
; the 
 is also used. Both handguns are to be replaced by the 
 through the 
 program.
 Soldiers are also equipped with various 
, such as the 
 and 
.

Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the 
 (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the squad level.
 Indirect fire is provided by the 
. The 
 or the 
 are used for 
 and close-quarters combat. The 
 is used by designated marksmen. Snipers use the 
, the 
 and the 
.

The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.

The 
 is the U.S. Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.
 The 
 is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun. In the same way, the 40 mm 
 is mainly used by motorized units.


The U.S. Army uses three types of 
 for indirect fire support when heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of these is the 60 mm 
, normally assigned at the infantry company level.
 At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81 mm 
.
 The largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120 mm 
, usually employed by mechanized units.


Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105 mm 
 and the 155 mm 
.


The U.S. Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The 
 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters. The 
 is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking anti-aircraft missile. The 
 and 
 are anti-tank guided missiles.

U.S. Army doctrine puts a premium on mechanized warfare. It fields the highest vehicle-to-soldier ratio in the world as of 2009.
 The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the 
, which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform and ambulance, among many other roles.
 While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the family of 
 vehicles. The 
 is the army's 
,
 while the 
 is the standard 
.
 Other vehicles include the 
,
 the 
 and multiple types of 
 (MRAP) vehicles.

The U.S. Army's principal 
 weapons are the 
 self-propelled howitzer
 and the 
 (MLRS),
 both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.

While the 
 operates a few 
, it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the 
 
,
 the 
 utility tactical transport helicopter
 and the 
 heavy-lift transport helicopter.
 Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from 7 to 4 types.
 The Army is evaluating two fixed-wing aircraft demonstrators; ARES, and Artemis are under evaluation to replace the Guardrail ISR (Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) aircraft.
 Under the 
, the Army agreed to limit its fixed-wing aviation role to administrative mission support (light unarmed aircraft which cannot operate from forward positions). For 
, the Army is deploying at least one company of drone 
 to each Active Army division.


The 
 (ACU) currently features a camouflage pattern known as 
 (OCP); OCP replaced a pixel-based pattern known as 
 (UCP) in 2019.

On 11 November 2018, the Army announced a new version of 'Army Greens' based on uniforms worn during World War II that will become the standard garrison service uniform.
 The blue 
 will remain as the dress uniform. The Army Greens are projected to be first fielded in the summer of 2020.


The 
 of enlisted personnel displays their 
 (shown above). The U.S. Army's black beret is no longer worn with the ACU for garrison duty, having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap. After years of complaints that it was not suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General 
 eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011. Soldiers who are currently in a unit in jump status still wear berets, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified or not (maroon beret), while members of 
 (SFABs) wear brown berets. Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade (tan beret) and Special Forces (rifle green beret) may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.

The Army has relied heavily on 
 to provide the various facilities needed while on deployment (Force Provider Expeditionary (FPE)).
 The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary 
 (sleeping quarters), 
 buildings (dining facilities),
 forward operating bases (FOBs), after-action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare and recreation (MWR) facilities, as well as security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of 
.  Each FPE contains billeting, latrines, showers, laundry and kitchen facilities for 50–150 Soldiers,
 and is stored in 
.  This provisioning allows combatant commanders to position soldiers as required in their 
, within 24 to 48 hours.

The U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the 
 (DRASH). In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.



				Pages for logged out editors 

			




In some circumstances, pages may need to be 
 from modification by certain groups of editors. Pages are protected when a specific damaging event has been identified that can not be prevented through other means such as a 
. Otherwise, Wikipedia is built on the principle that 
, and it therefore aims to have as many of its pages as possible open for public editing so that anyone can add material and correct errors. This policy states in detail the protection types and procedures for page protection and unprotection and when each protection should and should not be applied.

Protection is a technical restriction applied only by 
, although any user may 
. Protection can be 
 or expire after a specified time. The various levels of protection are detailed below, and they can be applied to the page edit, page move, page create, and file upload actions. Even when a page is protected from editing, the 
 (
) of the page can still be viewed and copied by anyone.

A protected page is marked at its top right by a padlock icon, usually added by the 
 template.

Applying page protection as a preemptive measure is contrary to the open nature of Wikipedia and is generally not allowed if applied solely for these reasons. However, brief periods of an appropriate and reasonable protection level are allowed in situations where blatant vandalism, disruption, or abuse is occurring by multiple users and at a level of frequency that requires its use in order to stop it. The duration of the protection should be set as short as possible, and the protection level should be set to the lowest restriction needed in order to stop the disruption while still allowing productive editors to make changes.

The following technical options are available to administrators for protecting different actions to pages:

The following technical options are available to administrators for adding protection levels to the different actions to pages:

Any type of protection (with the exception of 
) may be requested at 
. Changes to a protected page should be proposed on the corresponding 
, and then (if necessary) requested by adding an 
. From there, if the requested changes are uncontroversial or if there is 
 for them, the changes can be carried out by a user who can edit the page.

Except in the case of 
 (see 
), 
 remedies, or pages in the MediaWiki namespace (see 
), administrators may unprotect a page if the reason for its protection no longer applies, a reasonable period has elapsed, and there is no consensus that continued protection is necessary. Editors desiring the unprotection of a page should, in the first instance, ask the administrator who applied the protection unless the administrator is inactive or no longer an administrator; thereafter, requests may be made at 
. Note that such requests will normally be declined if the protecting administrator is active and was not consulted first. A log of protections and unprotections is available at 
.





Semi-protected pages cannot be edited by 
 (
), as well as accounts that are not 
 or 
 (accounts that are at least four days old and have made at least ten edits to Wikipedia). Semi-protection is useful when there is a significant amount of disruption or 
 from new or unregistered users, or to prevent 
 of blocked or banned users from editing, especially when it occurs on 
 who have had a recent high level of media interest. An alternative to semi-protection is 
, which is sometimes favored when an article is being vandalized regularly, but otherwise receives a low amount of editing.

Such users can request edits to a semi-protected page by proposing them on its talk page, using the {{
}} template if necessary to gain attention. If the page in question and its talk page are 
 protected, the edit request should be made at 
 instead. New users may also request the confirmed user right at 
.

Administrators may apply 
 semi-protection to pages that are subject to heavy and persistent 
 or violations of 
 (such as 
, 
). Semi-protection should 
 be used as a preemptive measure against vandalism that has not yet occurred or to privilege registered users over unregistered users in (valid) content disputes.

In addition, administrators may apply 
 semi-protection on pages that are:

 may be semi-protected just like any other article. However since the article is subject to sudden spurts of vandalism during certain times of day, administrators should semi-protect it for brief periods of time in most instances. For the former guideline, see 
.

Pending changes protection is a tool used to suppress 
 and certain other persistent problems while allowing all users to continue to submit edits. Pending changes protection can be used as an alternative to semi-protection to allow unregistered and new users to edit pages, while keeping the edits hidden from most readers until those changes are accepted by a 
.

When a page under pending changes protection is edited by an 
 (IP addresses) editor or a 
, the edit is not directly visible to the majority of Wikipedia readers, until it is reviewed and accepted by an editor with the 
. When a page under pending changes protection is edited by an 
, the edit will be immediately visible to Wikipedia readers, unless there are pending edits waiting to be reviewed.

Pending changes are visible in the page history, where they are marked as pending review. Readers that are 
 (the vast majority of readers) are shown the latest 
 version of the page; 
 users see the latest version of the page, with all changes (reviewed or not) applied. When editors who are not reviewers make changes to an article with unreviewed pending changes, their edits are also marked as pending and are not visible to most readers.

A user who clicks "edit this page" is always, at that point, shown the latest version of the page for editing 
.

Reviewing of pending changes should be resolved within reasonable time limits.

Pending changes may be used to protect articles against:

Pending changes protection should not be used as a preemptive measure against violations that have not yet occurred. Like semi-protection, PC protection should 
 be used in genuine content disputes, where there is a risk of placing a particular group of editors (unregistered users) at a disadvantage. Pending changes protection should not be used on articles with a very high edit rate, even if they meet the aforementioned criteria. Instead, semi-protection should be considered.

In addition, administrators may apply temporary pending changes protection on pages that are subject to significant but temporary vandalism or disruption (for example, due to media attention) when blocking individual users is not a feasible option. As with other forms of protection, the time frame of the protection should be proportional to the problem. Indefinite PC protection should be used only in cases of severe long-term disruption.

Removal of pending changes protection can be requested of any administrator, or at 
.

The reviewing process is described in detail at 
.

Administrators can prevent the creation of pages. This type of protection is useful for pages that have been 
 but repeatedly recreated. Such protection is case-sensitive. There are several levels of creation protection that can be applied to pages, identical to the levels for edit protection. A list of protected titles may be found at 
 (see also 
).

Pre-emptive restrictions on new article titles are instituted through the 
 system, which allows for more flexible protection with support for 
 and 
.

Pages that have been creation-protected are sometimes referred to as "
". Editors wishing to re-create a salted title with appropriate content should either contact an 
 (preferably the protecting administrator), file a request at 
, or use the 
 process. To make a convincing case for re-creation, it is helpful to show a 
 of the intended article when filing a request.

Administrators should choose the appropriate level of create protection—autoconfirmed, extended-confirmed,
 or full. Due to the implementation of 
, non-confirmed editors cannot create pages in 
; thus, semi-creation protection should be used only for protection of pages outside of mainspace.

While creation-protection is usually permanent, temporary creation protection may be applied if a page is repeatedly recreated by a single user (or 
 of that user, if applicable).

Move-protected pages, or more technically, fully move-protected pages, cannot be moved to a new title except by an administrator. Move protection is commonly applied to:

Fully edit-protected pages are also implicitly move-protected.

As with full edit protection, protection because of edit warring 
. When move protection is applied during a requested move discussion, the page should be protected at the location it was at when the move request was started.

All 
 are implicitly move-protected; only 
 and administrators can rename files.

Upload-protected files, or more technically, fully upload-protected files, cannot be replaced with new versions except by an administrator. Upload protection does not protect file pages from editing. It may be applied by an administrator to:

As with full edit protection, administrators should avoid favoring one version over another, and protection should not be considered an endorsement of the current version. An exception to this rule is when they are protected due to upload vandalism.

Extended confirmed protection, also known as 30/500 protection, only allows edits by editors with the 
 user access level, granted automatically to registered users with at least 30 days tenure and at least 500 edits.

Where semi-protection has proven to be ineffective, administrators may use extended confirmed protection to combat disruption (such as 
, abusive 
, 
, etc.) on any topic.
 Extended confirmed protection should not be used as a preemptive measure against disruption that has not yet occurred, nor should it be used to privilege extended confirmed users over unregistered/new users in valid content disputes (except as general sanction enforcement; see below). Extended confirmed protection may be applied at the discretion of an administrator when creation-protecting a page.
 
 may be extended-confirmed protected at administrator discretion when template protection would be too restrictive and semi-protection would be ineffective to stop widespread disruption.


Two topic areas are under 
 "
" as a general sanction, in which only extended confirmed users may edit affected content; one is under a similar 
. The extended confirmed restriction slightly differs from the earlier "30/500 restriction", which was independent of extended confirmed status. Administrators are authorized to enforce this restriction through extended confirmed protection or any other means.
 It applies to:

As of September 23, 2016, a bot posts a notification in a subsection of 
 when this protection level is used.
 Any protection made as arbitration enforcement must be logged at 
. A full list of the 4126 pages under 30/500 protection can be found 
.

Users can request edits to an extended confirmed-protected page by proposing them on its talk page, using the 
 template if necessary to gain attention.

A template-protected page can be edited only by administrators or users in the Template editors group. This protection level should be used almost exclusively on 
 and 
. In cases where pages in other namespaces become transcluded to a very high degree, this protection level is also valid.

This is a protection level
 that replaces 
 on pages that are merely protected due to high transclusion rates, rather than content disputes. It should be used on templates whose risk factor would have otherwise warranted full protection. It should not be used on less risky templates on the grounds that the 
 user right exists—the existence of the right should not result in more templates becoming uneditable for the general editing community. In borderline cases, 
 or lower may be applied to high risk templates that the general editing community still needs to edit regularly. A full list of the pages under template protection can be found 
.

Editors may request edits to a template-protected page by proposing them on its talk page, using the 
 template if necessary to gain attention.

A fully protected page cannot be edited or moved by anyone except 
. The protection may be for a specified time or may be indefinite.

Modifications to a fully protected page can be proposed on its 
 (or at another appropriate forum) for discussion. Administrators can make changes to the protected article reflecting 
. Placing the 
 template on the talk page will draw the attention of administrators for implementing uncontroversial changes.

While content disputes and 
 may be addressed with user 
 issued by 
 administrators, allowing normal page editing by other editors at the same time, the protection policy provides an alternative approach as administrators have the discretion to temporarily fully protect an article to end an ongoing edit war. This approach may better suit multi-party disputes and contentious content, as it makes talk page 
 a requirement for implementation of 
.



When protecting a page because of a content dispute, administrators have a duty to avoid protecting a version that contains policy-violating content, such as 
, 
, 
, or 
. Administrators are deemed to remain uninvolved when exercising discretion on whether to apply protection to the current version of an article, or to an older, 
, or pre-edit-war version.

Fully protected pages may not be edited except to make changes that are uncontroversial or for which there is clear consensus. Editors convinced that the protected version of an article contains policy-violating content, or that protection has rewarded edit warring or disruption by establishing a contentious revision, may identify a stable version 
 the edit war and 
 reversion to that version. Before making such a request, editors should consider how independent editors might view the suggestion and recognize that continuing an edit war is grounds for being blocked.

Administrators who have made substantive content changes to an article are considered 
 and must not use their advanced permissions to further their own positions. When involved in a dispute, it is almost always wisest to respect the editing policies that bind all editors and call for input from an uninvolved administrator, rather than to invite controversy by acting unilaterally.

If a deleted page is going through 
, only administrators are normally capable of viewing the former content of the page. If they feel it would benefit the discussion to allow other users to view the page content, administrators may 
 the page, blank it or replace the contents with 
 template or a similar notice, and fully protect the page to prevent further editing. The previous contents of the page are then accessible to everyone via the 
.

Generic file names such as 
, 
, 
, and 
 are fully protected to prevent new versions from being uploaded. Furthermore, 
 and 
 are 
.

Cascading protection fully protects a page, and extends that full protection 
 to any page that is 
 onto the protected page, whether directly or indirectly. This includes templates, images and other media that are hosted on the English Wikipedia. Files stored on Commons are 
 protected by any other wiki's cascading protection and, if they are to be protected, must be either temporarily uploaded to the English Wikipedia or explicitly protected at Commons (whether manually or through cascading protection there). When operational, 
 cascade-protects Commons files transcluded at 
, 
 and 
. As the bot's response time varies, media should 
 be transcluded on the main page (or its constituent templates) until after it has been protected. (This is particularly relevant to 
, for which upcoming images are not queued at 
.) Cascading protection:

The list of cascading-protected pages can be found at 
. Requests to add or remove cascading protection on a page should be made at 
 as an 
.

Administrators cannot change or remove the protection for some areas on Wikipedia, which are permanently protected by the 
 software:

Such protection is called Permanent, Interface, or Indefinite protection; and pages under this protection level can only be edited by those with 
 permissions.

In addition to hard-coded protection, the following are usually fully protected for an indefinite period of time (though not necessarily with 
):

As outlined in 
, pages may be protected by 
 staff in response to issues such as copyright infringement or libel. 
. Administrators should 
 edit or unprotect such pages without permission from Wikimedia Foundation staff.


Superprotect was a level of protection, allowing editing only by 
. It was 
, and used the same day to override community consensus regarding the use of the Media Viewer on the 
's primary site JavaScript, 
. It was never used on the English Wikipedia. On November 5, 2015, the WMF decided to 
 superprotect from all Wikimedia wikis.

The 
 and 
 namespaces have namespace-wide protection, and the permissions to edit them are only available to WMF Staff.  There is one page on the English Wikipedia in these namespaces. A 
 for local access to this namespace has been pending since 2019.

Cascading semi-protection was formerly possible, but it was disabled in 2007 after 
 that non-administrators could fully protect any page by transcluding it onto the page to which cascading semi-protection had been applied by an administrator.

Originally, two levels of pending changes protection existed, where level
2 required edits by all users who are not 
 to be reviewed. Following a community discussion, level
2 was retired from the English Wikipedia in January 2017. It was suggested then that "Pending changes level
1" be referred to in the future as simply "Pending changes".


Modifications to a protected page can be proposed on its 
 (or at another appropriate forum) for discussion. Administrators can make changes to the protected article reflecting 
. Placing the 
 template on the talk page will draw the attention of administrators for implementing uncontroversial changes.

Talk pages are not usually protected, and are semi-protected only for a limited duration in the most severe cases of vandalism.

User talk pages are rarely protected. However, protection may be applied if there is severe vandalism or abuse. Users whose talk pages are protected may wish to have an unprotected user talk subpage linked conspicuously from their main talk page to allow good-faith comments from users that the protection restricts editing from.

A user's request to have their own talk page protected is not a sufficient rationale by itself to protect the page, although requests may be considered if a reason is provided.

Blocked users' user talk pages should not ordinarily be protected, as this interferes with the user's ability to contest their block through the normal process. It also prevents others from being able to use the talk page to communicate with the blocked editor.

In extreme cases of abuse by the blocked user, such as abuse of the {{
}} template, re-blocking the user with talk page access removed should be preferred over applying protection to the page. If the user has been blocked and with the ability to edit their user talk page disabled, they should be informed of this in a block notice, subsequent notice, or message, and it should include information and instructions for appealing their block off-wiki, such as through the 
 or, as a last recourse, 
.

When required, protection should be implemented for only a brief period, not exceeding the duration of the block.

Confirmed socks of registered users should be dealt with in accordance with 
; their pages are not normally protected.

Base user pages (for example, the page User:Example, and not User:Example/subpage or User talk:Example) are automatically protected from creation or editing by unconfirmed accounts and anonymous IP users. An exception to this includes an unconfirmed registered account attempting to create or edit their own user page. IP editors and unconfirmed accounts are also unable to create or edit user pages that do not belong to a currently-registered account. This protection is enforced by 
.
 Users may opt-out of this protection by placing 
 anywhere on their own user page.

 and subpages within their own user space may be protected upon a request from the user, as long as a need exists. Pages within the user space should not be automatically or pre-emptively protected without good reason or cause.
 Requests for protection specifically at uncommon levels (such as template protection) may be granted if the user has expressed a genuine and realistic need.

When a filter is insufficient to stop user page vandalism, a user may choose to create a ".css" subpage (ex. User:Example/Userpage.css), copy all the contents of their user page onto the subpage, transclude the subpage by putting 
 on their user page, and then ask an administrator to fully protect their user page. Because user space pages that end in ".css", ".js", and ".json" are editable only by the user to which that user space belongs (and interface administrators), this will protect one's user page from further vandalism.

In the event of the confirmed death of a user, the user's user page (but not the user talk page) should be fully protected.

Highly visible templates – those used on a large number of pages or frequently substituted – are often edit protected based on the degree of visibility, type of use, content, and other considerations.

Protected templates should normally have the {{
}} template. It loads the unprotected 
 page, so that non-admins and IP-users can edit the documentation, categories and interwiki links. It also automatically adds {{
}} to protected templates, which displays a small padlock in the top right corner and categorizes the template as protected. Only manually add 
 to protected templates that don't use 
 (mostly the flag templates).

Cascading protection should generally not be applied directly to templates, as it will not protect transclusions inside 
 tags or transclusions that depend on template parameters, but 
 protect the template's 
. Instead, consider any of the following:

Note: All 
 (except those in userspace) are already protected via 
. They can be edited by admins, 
 and 
 only.

Sandboxes should not ordinarily be protected since their purpose is to let new users test and experiment with 
. Most sandboxes are automatically cleaned every 12 hours, although they are frequently overwritten by other testing users. The 
 is cleaned every hour. Those who use sandboxes for malicious purposes, or to violate policies such as 
, 
, or 
, should instead be warned and/or blocked.

The following templates may be added at the very top of a page to indicate that it is protected:

On redirect pages, use the {{
}} template, which automatically categorizes by protection level, below the redirect line. A protection template may also be added below the redirect line, but it will serve only to categorize the page, as it will not be visible on the page, and it will have to be manually removed when protection is removed.


				Pages for logged out editors 

			




The 
 (
 or 
), commonly known as the 
 (
 or 
) or 
, is a country 
 in 
. It consists of 50 
, a 
, five major 
, nine 
,
 and 326 
. It is the world's 
 by both land and total area.
 The United States shares land borders 
 to its north and 
 to its south. It has maritime borders with the 
, 
, 
, and other nations.
 With a population of over 333 million,
 it is the 
 country in the 
 and the 
 in the world. The national capital is 
 and the 
 city and 
 is 
.

 
 to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago, and advanced cultures began to appear later on. These advanced cultures had almost completely declined by the time 
 arrived in North America and began to 
. The United States emerged from the 
 when disputes with the 
 over taxation and 
 led to the 
 (1765–1791), which established the nation's independence. In the late 18th century, the U.S. began expanding across North America, gradually 
, sometimes through war, frequently 
, and admitting new states. By 1848, the United States spanned the 
 from east to west. The controversy surrounding the practice of 
 culminated in the secession of the 
, which fought the remaining states of the 
 during the 
 (1861–1865). With the Union's victory and preservation, slavery was abolished by the 
.

By 1900, the United States had become the 
, and the 
 and 
 established the country as a 
. After Japan's 
 in 1941, the U.S. entered 
 on the 
. The aftermath of the war left the United States and the 
 as the world's two 
. During the 
, both countries engaged in a struggle for ideological dominance but avoided direct military conflict. They also competed in the 
, which culminated in the 
 that first landed humans on the Moon. Simultaneously, the 
 (1954–1968) led to legislation abolishing state and local 
 and other codified racial discrimination against 
. The Soviet Union's dissolution in 1991 ended the Cold War, leaving the United States as the world's sole superpower. In 2001, following the 
, the United States launched the "
", which included the 
 (2001–2021) and the 
 (2003–2011).

The United States is a 
 with 
, including a 
. It is a 
 and 
; it 
 in international measures of 
, 
, 
 and 
, 
, and 
; and it has low levels of 
. It has high levels of 
 and 
, allows 
, and lacks 
. As a 
 of 
 and 
, the U.S. has been shaped by 
.

The United States is a highly 
, and 
 accounts for approximately a quarter of global 
 and is the world's 
 by GDP at market exchange rates. By value, the United States is the world's 
 importer and 
 exporter. Although it accounts for just over 4.2% of the world's total population, the U.S. holds 
 of the total wealth in the world, the largest share held by any country. The United States is a founding member of the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and is a 
 of the 
. The country makes up more than a third of 
 and is the 
 in the world and a leading 
, cultural, and 
 force.

The first known use of the name "
" dates to 1507, when it appeared on 
 produced by the German cartographer 
 in 
, 
 (now northeastern France). On his map, the name is shown in large letters on what would now be considered 
, honoring 
. The Italian explorer was the first to postulate that the 
 did not represent Asia's eastern limit but were part of a previously unknown landmass.
 In 1538, the Flemish cartographer 
 used the name "America" to refer to the entire 
.


The first documentary evidence of the phrase "United States of America" dates back to a letter from January 2, 1776, written by 
 to 
, George Washington's 
. Moylan expressed his wish to go "with full and ample powers from the United States of America to Spain" to seek assistance in the revolutionary war effort.
 The first known publication of the phrase "United States of America" was in an anonymous essay in 
 newspaper in 
, on April 6, 1776.


The second draft of the 
 and 
, prepared by 
 and completed no later than June 17, 1776, declared "The name of this Confederation shall be the 'United States of America'."
 The final version of the Articles, sent to the states for ratification in late 1777, stated that "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America'."
 In June 1776, 
 wrote the phrase "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA" in all capitalized letters in the headline of his "original Rough draught" of the 
.
 This draft of the document did not surface until June 21, 1776, and it is unclear whether it was written before or after Dickinson used the term in his June 17 draft of the Articles of Confederation.


The phrase "United States" was originally plural in American usage. It described a collection of states—e.g., "the United States are..." The singular form became popular after the end of the Civil War and is now standard usage. A 
 is called an "
". "United States", "American", and "U.S." refer to the country adjectivally ("American values", "U.S. forces"). In English, the word "American" rarely refers to topics or subjects not directly connected with the United States.


It is generally accepted that the 
 migrated from 
 by way of the 
 and arrived at least 12,000 years ago; however, some evidence suggests an even earlier date of arrival.
 The 
, which appeared around 11,000 BC, is believed to represent the first wave of human settlement of the Americas.
 This was likely the first of three major waves of migration into North America; later waves brought the ancestors of present-day 
, 
, and 
.


Over time, indigenous cultures in North America grew increasingly sophisticated, and some, such as the pre-Columbian 
 in the southeast, developed advanced 
, 
, and complex societies.
 The city-state of 
 is the largest, most complex pre-Columbian 
 in the modern-day United States.
 In the 
 region, 
 culture developed from centuries of agricultural experimentation.
 The 
 are one of the most populous and widespread 
 
 language groups. Historically, the peoples were prominent along the Atlantic Coast and into the interior along the 
 and around the 
. This grouping consists of the peoples who speak 
.
 Before Europeans came into contact, most Algonquian settlements lived by hunting and fishing, although quite a few supplemented their diet by cultivating 
, 
 and 
 (the "
). The 
 cultivated 
.
 The 
 of the 
, located in the southern Great Lakes region, was established at some point between the twelfth and fifteenth centuries.


 during European contact is difficult.
 
 of the 
 estimated a population of 93,000 in the 
 and a population of 473,000 in the Gulf states,
 but most academics regard this figure as too low.
 Anthropologist 
 believed the populations were much higher, suggesting around 1.1 million along the shores of the 
, 2.2 million people living between 
 and 
, 5.2 million in the 
 and tributaries, and around 700,000 people in the 
.


Claims of very early colonization of 
 by the 
 are disputed and controversial.
 The first documented arrival of Europeans in the continental United States is that of Spanish 
 such as 
, who made his first expedition to 
 in 1513.
 The Italian explorer 
, sent by France to the New World in 1525, encountered native inhabitants of what is now 
.
  Even earlier, 
 had landed in 
 on his 
, and 
 was settled by the Spanish a decade later.
 The Spanish set up the first settlements in Florida and New Mexico, such as 
, often considered the nation's oldest city,
 and 
. The French 
 their own settlements along the 
 and 
, notably 
 and 
.


Successful 
 of the eastern coast of North America began with the 
 in 1607 at 
 and with the 
' 
 in 1620.
 The continent's first elected legislative assembly, Virginia's 
, was founded in 1619. 
 was established in the 
 in 1636 as the first institution of higher education. The 
 and the 
 established precedents for representative self-government and constitutionalism that would develop throughout the American colonies.
 Many English settlers were 
 who came seeking 
. The 
 after European arrival for various reasons,
 primarily from diseases such as 
 and 
.


In the early days of colonization, many European settlers experienced food shortages, disease, and conflicts with 
, such as in 
. Native Americans were also often fighting neighboring tribes and European settlers. In many cases, however, the natives and settlers came to depend on each other. Settlers 
 for food and animal pelts; natives for guns, tools and other European goods.
 Natives taught many settlers to cultivate corn, beans, and other foodstuffs. European missionaries and others felt it was important to "civilize" the Native Americans and urged them to adopt European agricultural practices and lifestyles.
 However, with the increased European 
 of North America, 
 were displaced and often killed during conflicts.


European settlers also began 
 
 into Colonial America via the 
.
 Because of a lower prevalence of tropical diseases and relatively better 
, slaves had a much higher life expectancy in North America than in South America, leading to a rapid increase in their numbers.
 Colonial society was largely divided over the religious and moral implications of slavery, and several colonies passed acts for or against the practice.
 However, by the turn of the 18th century, African slaves had supplanted European 
 as 
 labor, especially in the American South.


The 
 that would become the United States of America were administered by the British as overseas dependencies.
 
 with elections open to most free men.
 With very high birth rates, low death rates, and steady settlement, the colonial population grew rapidly, eclipsing Native American populations.
 The 
 movement of the 1730s and 1740s known as the 
 fueled interest both in religion and in religious liberty.


During the 
 (1756–1763), known in the U.S. as the 
, British forces captured Canada from the French. With the creation of the 
, Canada's 
 population would remain isolated from the English-speaking colonial dependencies of 
, 
 and the Thirteen Colonies. Excluding the Native Americans who lived there, the Thirteen Colonies had a population of over 2.1 million in 1770, about a third that of Britain. Despite continuing new arrivals, the rate of natural increase was such that by the 1770s only a small minority of Americans had been born overseas.
 The colonies' distance from Britain had allowed the development of self-government, but their unprecedented success motivated British monarchs to periodically seek to reassert royal authority.


The 
 separated the Thirteen Colonies from the 
, and was the first successful 
 by a non-European entity against a European power in 
. By the 18th century the 
 and 
 were pervasive among leaders. Americans began to develop an ideology of "
", asserting that government rested on the 
. They demanded their "
" and "
".
 The British insisted on administering the colonies through a 
 that did not have a single representative responsible for any American constituency, and the conflict escalated into war.


In 1774, the 
 passed the 
, which mandated a 
 boycott of British goods. The 
 began the following year, catalyzed by events like the 
 and the 
 that were rooted in colonial disagreement with British governance.
 The 
, an assembly representing the 
, unanimously adopted the 
 on July 4, 1776 (annually celebrated as 
).
 In 1781, the 
 and 
 established a decentralized government that operated until 1789.
  A celebrated early turn in the war for the Americans was 
 leading the Americans to 
 in a surprise attack the night of December 25–26, 1776. Another victory, in 1777, at the 
 resulted in the capture of a British army, and led to 
 and 
 joining in the war against them. After the surrender of a second British army at the 
 in 1781, Britain signed a 
. American sovereignty became internationally recognized, and the new nation took possession of substantial territory east of the 
, from what is today 
 in the north and 
 in the south.


As it became increasingly apparent that the Confederation was insufficient to govern the new country, 
 advocated for and led the 
 of 1787 in writing the 
 to replace it, 
 in state conventions in 1788. Going into force in 1789, this constitution reorganized the government into a 
 administered by 
 (executive, judicial and legislative), on the principle of creating salutary 
. George Washington, who had led the 
 to victory and then willingly relinquished power, was the first 
 elected under the new constitution. The 
, forbidding federal restriction of 
 and guaranteeing a range of legal protections, was adopted in 1791.
 
, however, leading to the 
, which was fought to a draw.



Although the federal government 
 American participation in the 
 in 1807, after 1820, cultivation of the highly profitable cotton crop exploded in the 
, and along with it, the use of 
.
 The 
, especially in the period 1800–1840, converted millions to 
 Protestantism. In the North, it energized multiple social reform movements, including 
;
 in the South, 
 and 
 proselytized among slave populations.
 
In the late 18th century, American settlers began to 
, some of them with a sense of 
.
 The 1803 
 almost doubled the nation's area,
 
 and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819,
 the 
 was 
 in 1845 during a period of expansionism,
 and the 1846 
 with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day 
.
 Additionally, the 
 in the 1830s exemplified the 
 that forcibly resettled Indians. This further expanded acreage under mechanical cultivation, increasing surpluses for international markets. This prompted a long series of 
 west of the 
 from 1810 to at least 1890.
   and eventually, conflict with Mexico.
 Most of these conflicts ended with the cession of Native American territory and their confinement to 
. Victory in the 
 resulted in the 1848 
 of 
 and much of the present-day 
, and the U.S. spanned the continent.
 The 
 of 1848–1849 spurred migration to the Pacific coast, which led to the 
 and the creation of additional western states.
 Economic development was spurred by giving vast quantities of land, nearly 10% of the total area of the United States, to white European settlers as part of the 
, as well as making 
 to private railroad companies and 
.
  Prior to the Civil War, 
 exacerbated tensions over 
.

Irreconcilable sectional conflict regarding 
 of Africans and 
 ultimately 
.
 With the 
 of Republican 
, conventions in eleven slave states declared 
 and formed the 
, while the federal government (the "
") maintained that 
.
 On April 12, 1861, the Confederacy initiated military conflict by 
, a federal garrison in 
, South Carolina. This would be the spark of the Civil War, which lasted for four years (1861–1865) and became the deadliest military conflict in American history. The war would result in the deaths of approximately 620,000 soldiers from both sides and upwards of 50,000 civilians, almost all of them in the South.


 began in earnest following the war. While President Lincoln attempted to foster friendship and forgiveness between the Union and the former Confederacy, 
 on April 14, 1865 drove a wedge between North and South again. Republicans in the federal government made it their goal to oversee the rebuilding of the South and to ensure the rights of African Americans. They persisted until the 
, when the Republicans agreed to cease protecting the rights of African Americans in the South in order for Democrats to concede the 
. Southern white Democrats, calling themselves "
", took control of the South after the end of Reconstruction, beginning the 
. From 1890 to 1910, the Redeemers established so-called 
, 
 most blacks and some impoverished whites throughout the region. Blacks would face 
 nationwide, especially in the South.
 They also occasionally experienced vigilante violence, including 
.


In the North, 
 and an unprecedented 
 from 
 and 
 supplied a surplus of labor for the country's industrialization and transformed its culture.
 

National infrastructure, including 
 and 
, spurred economic growth and greater settlement and development of the 
. After the 
, new transcontinental 
 made relocation easier for settlers, expanded internal trade, and increased conflicts with Native Americans.
 The later inventions of 
 and the 
 would also affect communication and urban life.


Mainland expansion also included the 
 from 
 in 1867.
 In 1893, pro-American elements in Hawaii 
 the 
 and formed the 
, which the U.S. 
 in 1898. Puerto Rico, 
, and the 
 were ceded by Spain in the same year, following the 
.
 
 was acquired by the United States in 1900 after the end of the 
.
 The 
 were purchased from 
 in 1917.


 during the late 19th and early 20th centuries fostered the rise of many prominent industrialists. 
 like 
, 
, and 
 led the nation's progress in the 
, 
, and 
 industries. Banking became a major part of the economy, with 
 playing a notable role. The American economy boomed, becoming the world's largest.
 

These dramatic changes were accompanied by 
 and social unrest, which prompted the rise of 
 along with 
, 
, and 
 movements.
 This period eventually ended with the advent of the 
, which saw significant reforms including 
 of consumer goods, the rise of 
, and greater 
 to ensure competition among businesses and attention to worker conditions.

The United States remained neutral from the outbreak of 
 in 1914 until 1917 when it joined the war as an "associated power" alongside the 
, helping to turn the tide against the 
. In 1919, President 
 took a leading diplomatic role at the 
 and advocated strongly for the U.S. to join the 
. However, the Senate refused to approve this and did not ratify the 
 that established the League of Nations.


Around this time, millions of rural African Americans began 
; it would continue until about 1970.
 The last vestiges of the Progressive Era resulted in 
 and 
.
 In 1920, the women's rights movement won passage of a 
 granting 
.
 The 1920s and 1930s saw the rise of 
 for 
 and the invention of early 
.
 The prosperity of the 
 ended with the 
 and the onset of the 
. After his election as president in 1932, 
 responded with the 
.
 The 
 of the mid-1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration.


At first 
, the United States in March 1941 
 to the 
. On December 7, 1941, the 
 launched a surprise 
, prompting the United States to join the Allies against the 
, and in the following year, to 
 about 120,000 Japanese and Japanese Americans.
 The U.S. pursued a "
" defense policy,
 leaving 
, an 
, isolated and alone to fight Japan's 
 until the U.S.-led 
. During the war, the United States was one of the "
"
 who met to plan the postwar world, along with Britain, the Soviet Union, and China.
 The United States emerged 
 from the war, and with even greater economic and military influence.


The United States played a leading role in the 
 and 
 conferences, which signed agreements on new international financial institutions and Europe's postwar reorganization. As an 
, a 1945 
 held in 
 produced the 
, which became active after the war.
 The United States and Japan then fought each other in the largest naval battle in history, the 
.
 The United States developed the 
 and used them on Japan 
 in August 1945; the Japanese 
 on September 2, ending World War II.


After 
, the United States financed and implemented the 
 to help rebuild western Europe; disbursements paid between 1948 and 1952 would total $13 billion ($115 billion in 2021).
 Also at this time, 
 tensions between the United States and 
 led to the 
, driven by an ideological divide between 
 and 
.
 They dominated the military affairs of Europe, with the U.S. and its 
 allies on one side and the Soviet Union and its 
 allies on the other.
 The U.S. often opposed 
 movements that it viewed as Soviet-sponsored, sometimes pursuing direct action for 
 against 
 governments.
 American troops fought the communist forces in the 
 of 1950–1953,
 and the U.S. became increasingly involved in the 
 (1955–1975), introducing combat forces in 1965.
 Their competition to achieve superior 
 capability led to the 
, which culminated in the U.S. becoming the first nation to 
 in 1969.
 While both countries engaged in 
 and developed powerful 
, they avoided direct military conflict.


At home, the United States experienced 
, 
, and a 
 and 
 following World War II. Construction of an 
 transformed the nation's transportation infrastructure in decades to come.
 In 1959, the United States admitted 
 and 
 to become the 49th and 50th states, formally expanding beyond the 
.


The growing 
 used 
 to confront 
, with 
 becoming a prominent leader and figurehead.
 President 
 initiated legislation that led to a series of policies addressing poverty and racial inequalities, in what he termed the "
". The launch of a "
" expanded 
 spending, leading to the creation of the 
, 
, along with national 
 programs 
 and 
.
 A combination of court decisions and legislation, culminating in the 
, made significant improvements.
 Meanwhile, a 
 grew, which was fueled by 
, the 
, and the 
.
 The 
 in the U.S. broadened the debate on women's rights and made 
 a major social goal. The 1969 
 in New York City marked the beginning of the fledgling 
 movement.


The United States supported 
 during the 
; in response, the country faced an oil 
 from 
 nations, sparking the 
. After a surge in female labor participation around the 1970s, by 1985, the majority of women aged 16 and over were employed.
 The 1970s and early 1980s also saw the onset of 
. The presidency of 
 saw the American withdrawal from Vietnam but also the 
 which led to a decline in public trust of government.


After his election in 1980 President 
 responded to economic stagnation with 
 and initiated the more aggressive 
 towards the Soviet Union.
 During Reagan's presidency, the federal debt held by the public nearly tripled in nominal terms, from $738 billion to $2.1 trillion.
 This led to the United States moving from the world's largest international creditor to the world's largest debtor nation.
 The 
 in 1991 ended the Cold War,
 ensuring a global 
 in which the U.S. was unchallenged as the world's dominant 
.


Fearing the spread of 
 international instability from the 
, in August 1991, President 
 launched and led the 
 against Iraq, expelling Iraqi forces and restoring the 
.
 Beginning in 1994, the U.S. signed the 
 (NAFTA), causing trade among the U.S., Canada, and Mexico to soar.
 Due to the 
, stable monetary policy, and 
, the 1990s saw the 
 in modern U.S. history.


On 
, 
 terrorist hijackers flew passenger planes into the 
 in New York City and 
 near Washington, D.C., killing nearly 3,000 people.
 In response, President 
 launched the 
, which included a nearly 20-year 
 from 2001 to 2021 and the 2003–2011 
.
 Government policy designed to promote affordable housing,
 widespread failures in corporate and regulatory governance,
 and historically low interest rates set by the Federal Reserve
 led to a 
 in 2006. This culminated in the 
 and the 
, the nation's largest economic contraction since the Great Depression.


, the first 
 president with 
 ancestry, 
 amid the financial crisis.
 By the end of his second term, the stock market, median household income and net worth, and the number of persons with jobs were all at record levels, while the unemployment rate was well below the historical average.
 His signature legislative accomplishment was the 
 (ACA), popularly known as "Obamacare". It represented the 
's most significant regulatory overhaul and expansion of coverage since Medicare in 1965. As a result, the uninsured share of the population was cut in half, while the number of newly insured Americans was estimated to be between 20 and 24 million.
 After Obama served two terms, Republican 
 was elected as the 
 in 
. 
 is viewed as one of the biggest political upsets in American history.
 Trump held office through 
 of the 
 and the resulting 
 starting in 2020 that exceeded even the Great Recession earlier in the century.


The early 2020s saw the country become more divided, with various social issues sparking debate and protest. The 
 in 2020 led to 
 and a national debate about 
 and lingering 
.
 The nationwide increase in the frequency of instances and number of deaths related to 
 added to the societal tensions.
 On January 6, 2021, supporters of the outgoing president, Trump, 
 in an unsuccessful effort to disrupt the 
 vote count that would confirm Democrat 
 as the 46th president.
 In 2022, the Supreme Court 
, causing 
 across the country and stoking international reactions as well.
 Despite these divisions, the country has remained unified against 
 after 
's 
, with politicians and individuals across the political spectrum supporting arms shipments to Ukraine and many large American corporations pulling out of Russia and Belarus altogether.


The 
 occupy a combined area of 3,119,885 square miles (8,080,470 km
). Of this area, 2,959,064 square miles (7,663,940 km
) is contiguous land, composing 83.65% of total U.S. land area.
 About 15% is occupied by 
, a state in northwestern North America,  with the remainder in 
, a state and  
 in the central 
, and the five populated but 
 insular territories of 
, 
, 
, the 
, and the 
.
 Measured by only land area, the United States is third in size behind Russia and China, and just ahead of Canada.


The United States is the world's 
 nation by total area (land and water), ranking behind Russia and Canada and nearly equal to China. The ranking varies depending on how two territories disputed by China and India are counted, and how the total size of the United States is measured.


The 
 of the 
 seaboard gives way further inland to 
 forests and the rolling hills of the 
.
 The 
 and the 
 
 divide the eastern seaboard from the 
 and the grasslands of the 
.
 The 
–
, the world's 
, runs mainly north–south through the heart of the country. The flat, fertile 
 of the 
 stretches to the west, interrupted by 
 in the southeast.


The 
, west of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, peaking at over 14,000 feet (4,300 m) in 
.
 Farther west are the rocky 
 and deserts such as the 
, 
, and 
.
 The 
 and 
 mountain ranges run close to the 
, both ranges also reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet (4,300 m). The 
 in the contiguous United States are in the state of California,
 and only about 84 miles (135 km) apart.
 At an elevation of 20,310 feet (6,190.5 m), Alaska's 
 is the highest peak in the country and in North America.
 Active 
 are common throughout Alaska's 
 and 
, and Hawaii consists of volcanic islands. The 
 underlying 
 in the 
 is the continent's largest volcanic feature.


The United States, with its large size and geographic variety, includes most climate types. To the east of the 
, the climate ranges from 
 in the north to 
 in the south.


The Great Plains west of the 100th meridian are 
. Many mountainous areas of the American West have an 
. The climate is 
 in the Great Basin, desert in the Southwest, 
 in 
, and 
 in coastal 
 and 
 and southern Alaska. Most of Alaska is 
 or 
. Hawaii and the southern tip of 
 are 
, as well as its territories in the 
 and the Pacific.


States bordering the 
 are prone to 
, and most of the world's 
 occur in the country, mainly in 
 areas in the Midwest and South.
 Overall, the United States receives more high-impact extreme weather incidents than any other country in the world.


Extreme weather has become more frequent in the U.S., with three times the number of reported 
 as in the 1960s. Of the ten warmest years ever recorded in the 48 contiguous states, eight have occurred since 1998. In the 
, droughts have become more persistent and more severe.




The U.S. is one of 17 
 containing large numbers of 
: about 17,000 species of 
 occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and more than 1,800 species of 
 are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland.
 The United States is home to 428 
 species, 784 
, 311 
, and 295 
,
 and 91,000 
 species.


There are 63 
 and hundreds of other federally managed parks, forests, and 
 areas, which are managed by the 
.
 Altogether, the government owns about 28% of the country's land area,
 mostly in the 
.
 Most of this land is 
, though some is leased for oil and gas drilling, mining, logging, or cattle ranching, and about .86% is used for military purposes.


 include debates on oil and 
, dealing with air and water pollution, the economic costs of protecting 
, logging and 
,
 and 
.
 The most prominent environmental agency is the 
 (EPA), created by presidential order in 1970.
 The idea of wilderness has shaped the management of public lands since 1964, with the 
.
 The 
 of 1973 is intended to protect threatened and endangered species and their habitats, which are monitored by the 
.


As of 2020, the U.S. ranked 24th among nations in the 
.
 The country joined the 
 on climate change in 2016, and has many other environmental commitments.
 It 
 from the Paris Agreement in 2020
 but rejoined it in 2021.


The United States is a federal republic of 50 
, a 
, 
 and several uninhabited 
.
 It is the world's oldest surviving 
. It is a 
 and a 
 "in which 
 is tempered by 
 protected by 
."
 In the American 
 system, sovereignty is shared between 
: federal and state. Citizens of the states are also governed by local governments, which are administrative divisions of the states. The territories are administrative divisions of the federal government.

The 
 serves as the country's supreme legal document. The Constitution establishes the structure and responsibilities of the federal government and its relationship with the individual states. The Constitution has been amended 27 times;
 the first ten amendments (
) and the 
 form the central basis of Americans' individual rights. All laws and governmental procedures are subject to 
, and any law can be voided if the courts determine that it violates the Constitution. The principle of judicial review, not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution, was established by the Supreme Court in 
 (1803).


The United States has operated under a 
 for most of its history.
 In American 
, the 
 Republican Party is considered "
" and the 
 Democratic Party is considered "
".
 On 
's 2019 
, its 
 position deteriorated from a score of 76 in 2015 to 69 in 2019.
 In 2021, the U.S. ranked 26th on the 
, and is described as a "flawed democracy".


The federal government comprises three branches, which are headquartered in Washington, D.C. and regulated by a system of 
 defined by the Constitution.


The 
, the 
, has 435 voting members, each representing a 
 for a two-year term. House seats are 
 among the states by population. Each state then draws single-member districts to conform with the census apportionment. The District of Columbia and the five major U.S. territories each have 
—these members are not allowed to vote.


The 
, the 
, has 100 members with each state having two senators, elected 
 to six-year terms; one-third of Senate seats are up for election every two years. The District of Columbia and the five major U.S. territories do not have senators.
 The Senate is unique among upper houses in being the most prestigious and powerful portion of the country's 
; political scientists have frequently labeled it the "most powerful upper house" of any government.


The president serves a four-year term and may be elected to the office 
. The president is 
, but by an indirect 
 system in which the determining votes are apportioned to the states and the District of Columbia.
 The Supreme Court, led by the 
, has nine members, who serve for life.


Each of the 50 states holds jurisdiction over a geographic territory, where it shares 
 with the federal government. They are subdivided into 
, and further divided into 
. The District of Columbia is a 
 that contains the capital of the United States, the 
.
 Each state has the amount 
 equal to the number of their representatives plus senators in Congress, and the District of Columbia has three electors.
 Territories of the United States do not have presidential electors, therefore people there cannot vote for the president.


, the District of Columbia, and all major U.S. territories except American Samoa.
 The United States observes limited 
 of the American Indian nations, like states' sovereignty. American Indians are U.S. citizens and tribal lands are subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Congress and the federal courts. Like the states, tribes have some autonomy restrictions. They are prohibited from making war, engaging in their own foreign relations, and printing or issuing independent currency.
 
 are usually contained within one state, but there are 12 reservations that cross state boundaries.
 

The United States has an established structure of foreign relations, and it had the world's second-largest diplomatic corps in 2019.
 It is a 
 of the 
,
 and home to the 
.
 The United States is also a member of the 
,
 
,
 and 
 intergovernmental organizations.
 Almost all countries have 
 and many have 
 (official representatives) in the country. Likewise, nearly all nations host formal 
 with United States, except 
,
 
,
 and 
.
 Though 
 does not have formal diplomatic relations with the U.S., it maintains close, if unofficial, relations. The United States also regularly supplies Taiwan with 
.


The United States has a "
" with the 
 and strong ties with 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 and several 
 countries (
, 
, 
, 
, and 
).
 The U.S. works closely with its 
 allies on military and 
 issues, and with nations in the Americas through the 
 and the 
. In 
, 
 is traditionally considered to be the closest ally of the United States.
 The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for 
, the 
 and 
 through the 
.
 Since the 
, the U.S. has become a key ally of 
 since 
 
 and began an 
, significantly deteriorating relations with Russia in the process.
 The U.S. has also experienced a deterioration of relations with 
 and grown closer to 
.


The president is the 
 of the United States Armed Forces and appoints its leaders, the 
 and the 
. The 
, which is headquartered at 
 near Washington, D.C., administers five of the six service branches, which are made up of the 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. The 
 is administered by the 
 in peacetime and can be transferred to the 
 in wartime.
 The United States spent $649 billion on its military in 2019, 36% of global military spending. At 4.7% of GDP, the percentage was the second-highest among all countries, after 
.
 It also has 
, the second-largest after Russia.


In 2019, all six branches of the U.S. Armed Forces reported 1.4 million personnel on active duty.
 The 
 and 
 brought the total number of troops to 2.3 million.
 The Department of Defense also employed about 700,000 civilians, not including 
.
 Military service in the United States is voluntary, although 
 may occur in wartime through the 
.
 The United States has the third-largest combined armed forces in the world, behind the 
 and 
.


Today, American forces can be rapidly deployed by the Air Force's large fleet of 
, the Navy's 11 active 
, and 
 at sea with the Navy, and Army's 
 and 
 deployed by Air Force transport aircraft. The Air Force can strike targets across the globe through its fleet of 
, maintains the 
 across the United States, and provides 
 to Army and Marine Corps ground forces.
 The Space Force operates the 
, operates the 
 and 
 for all space launches, and operates the United States's 
 and 
 networks.
 The military operates about 800 bases and facilities abroad,
 and maintains 
 in 25 foreign countries.


There are about 18,000 U.S. police agencies from local to federal level in the United States.
 Law in the United States is mainly 
 by local police departments and 
's offices. The 
 provides broader services, and 
 such as the 
 (FBI) and the 
 have specialized duties, such as protecting 
, 
 and enforcing 
' rulings and federal laws.
 
 conduct most civil and criminal trials,
 and federal courts handle designated crimes and appeals from the state criminal courts.


As of 2020
, the United States has an 
 of 7 per 100,000 people.
 A cross-sectional analysis of the 
 Mortality Database from 2010 showed that United States homicide rates "were 7.0 times higher than in other high-income countries, driven by a gun homicide rate that was 25.2 times higher."


The United States has the 
 and 
 in the world.
 In 2019, the total prison population for those sentenced to more than a year is 1,430,800, corresponding to a ratio of 419 per 100,000 residents and the lowest since 1995.
 Some estimates place that number higher, such 
's 2.3 million.
 Various states have attempted to 
 via government policies and grassroots initiatives.


Although most nations have abolished 
,
 it is sanctioned in the United States for certain federal and military crimes, and in 27 states out of 50 and in one territory.
 Several of these states have 
 on carrying out the penalty, each imposed by the state's  governor.
 Since 1977, there have been more than 1,500 executions,
 giving the U.S. the sixth-highest number of executions in the world, following 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 However, the number is trended down nationally, with 
 recently abolishing the penalty.


According to the 
, the U.S. 
 (GDP) of $22.7 trillion constitutes 24% of the 
 at market exchange rates and over 16% of the gross world product at 
 (PPP).
 From 1983 to 2008, U.S. real compounded annual GDP growth was 3.3%, compared to a 2.3% weighted average for the rest of the G7.
 The country ranks fifth in the world in 
 and seventh in 
.
 The country has been the 
 since at least 1900.


The United States is the most 
 powerful and 
 nation, especially in 
, 
, 
, and 
, 
, and 
.
 The nation's economy is fueled by abundant 
, a well-developed infrastructure, and high productivity.
 It has the second-highest total-estimated value of natural resources, valued at 
 44.98
trillion in 2019, although sources differ on their estimates.
 Americans have the highest average 
 and 
 income among 
 member states.
 In 2013, they had the sixth-highest 
, down from fourth-highest in 2010.


The 
 is the currency most used in 
 and is the world's foremost 
, backed by its economy, its 
, the 
 and its linked 
 and large 
.
 Several countries 
 and in others it is the 
.
 The 
 and 
 are the world's 
 by 
 and 
.


The 
 are 
, the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, the 
, and 
.
 The U.S. is the world's 
 and the 
.
 It has 
 with 
, including the 
.
 The U.S. ranked second in the 
 in 2019, after 
.
 Of the world's 
, 124 are headquartered in the U.S.


While its economy has reached a 
 level of development, the United States remains an industrial power.
 It has a smaller 
 and redistributes less income through government action than most other 
 countries.
 The United States ranked the 41st highest in 
 among 156 countries in 2017,
 and the highest compared to the rest of the 
.
 As of January 1, 2023, the United States had a 
 of $31.4 trillion.


Accounting for 4.24% of the 
, Americans collectively 
 of the world's total wealth as of 2021, the largest percentage of any country.
 The U.S. also ranks first in the number of dollar 
 and 
 in the world, with 724 billionaires (as of 2021)
 and nearly 22 million millionaires (2021).
 

 is 
; the richest 10% of the adult population own 72% of the country's household wealth, while the bottom 50% own just 2%.
 
 in the U.S. remains at record highs,
 with the top fifth of earners taking home more than half of all income
 and giving the U.S. one of the widest income distributions among OECD members.


The United States is the only 
 that does not 
 and is one of a few countries in the world without 
 as a legal right.
 The United States also has a higher percentage of low-income workers than almost any other developed nation, largely because of a weak 
 system and lack of government support for at-risk workers.


There were about 567,715 sheltered and unsheltered 
 in January 2019, with almost two-thirds staying in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program.
 Attempts to combat homelessness include the 
 housing voucher program and implementation of the 
 strategy across all levels of government.
 

In 2011, 
, about 35% more than 2007 levels, though only 845,000 U.S. children (1.1%) saw reduced food intake or disrupted eating patterns at some point during the year, and most cases were not chronic.
 As of June 2018,
 40 million people, roughly 12.7% of the U.S. population, were living in poverty, including 13.3 million children. Of those impoverished, 18.5 million live in "deep poverty", family income below one-half of the federal government's poverty threshold.


The United States has been a leader in technological 
 since the late 19th century and scientific research since the mid-20th century. Methods for producing 
 and the establishment of a 
 industry enabled the 
 of sewing machines, bicycles, and other items in the late 19th century. In the early 20th century, factory 
, the introduction of the 
, and other labor-saving techniques created the system of 
.
 In the 21st century, approximately two-thirds of research and development funding comes from the private sector.
 In 2020, the United States was the country with the 
 number of published scientific papers
 and second most patents granted,
 both after China. In 2021, the United States launched a total of 51 
. (China reported 55.)
 The U.S. had 2,944 active 
 in space in December 2021, the highest number of any country.


In 1876, 
 was awarded the first U.S. 
. 
's 
 developed the 
, the first 
, and the first viable 
.
 The 
 in 1903 made the 
, and the automobile companies of 
 and 
 popularized the assembly line in the early 20th century.
 The rise of 
 and 
 in the 1920s and 30s led many European scientists, such as 
, 
, and 
, to immigrate to the United States.
 During World War II, the Manhattan Project developed nuclear weapons, ushering in the 
. During the Cold War, competition for superior missile capability ushered in the 
 between the U.S. and Soviet Union.
 The invention of the 
 in the 1950s, a key component in almost all modern 
, led to the development of 
, 
, 
 and the 
.
 In 2022, the United States ranked 2nd in the 
.


As of 2019
, the United States receives approximately 80% of its energy from fossil fuels.
 In 2019, the largest source of the country's energy came from 
 (36.6%), followed by 
 (32%), 
 (11.4%), renewable sources (11.4%) and 
 (8.4%).
 Americans constitute less than 5% of the 
, but consume 17% of the 
.
 They account for about 25% of the world's 
, while producing only 6% of the world's annual petroleum supply.
 The U.S. ranks as second-highest emitter of greenhouse gases, exceeded only by China.


The United States's 
, nearly all 
, is the 
, and exceeds 293,564 km (182,400 mi).
 It handles mostly freight, with intercity passenger service provided by 
 to all but four states.
 The country's 
 are the world's 
, and total 41,009 km (25,482 mi).


Personal transportation is dominated by automobiles, which operate on a network of 4 million miles (6.4 million kilometers) of public roads.
 The United States has the world's second-largest automobile market,
 and has the highest vehicle ownership per capita in the world, with 816.4 vehicles per 1,000 Americans (2014).
 In 2017, there were 255 million non-two wheel motor vehicles, or about 910 vehicles per 1,000 people.


The 
 is entirely privately owned and has been largely 
, while 
 are publicly owned.
 The three largest airlines in the world by passengers carried are U.S.-based; 
 is number one after its 2013 acquisition by 
.
 Of the 
, 16 are in the United States, including the busiest, 
.
 Of the 
, four are located in the United States, of which the busiest is the 
.


Racial and ethnic groups in the United States (2020 Census)


The 
 reported 331,449,281 residents as of April 1, 2020,
 making the United States the 
 nation in the world, after China and India.
 According to the Bureau's 
, on January 28, 2021, the U.S. population had a net gain of one person every 100 seconds, or about 864 people per day.
 In 2018, 52% of Americans age 15 and over were married, 6% were widowed, 10% were divorced, and 32% had never been married.
 In 2020, the U.S. had a 
 stood at 1.64 children per woman
 and the world's highest rate (23%) of children living in 
 households.


The United States of America has a diverse population; 37 
 have more than one million members.
 
 with ancestry from Europe, the Middle East or North Africa, form the largest 
 and 
 at 57.8% of the United States population.
 
 form the second-largest group and are 18.7% of the United States population. 
 constitute the nation's third-largest ancestry group and are 12.1% of the total United States population.
 
 are the country's fourth-largest group, composing 5.9% of the United States population, while the country's 3.7 million 
 account for about 1%.
 In 2020, the 
 of the United States population was 38.5 years.


In 2018, there were almost 90 million immigrants and 
 in the United States, accounting for 28% of the overall U.S. population.
 In 2017, out of the U.S. foreign-born population, some 45% (20.7 million) were naturalized citizens, 27% (12.3 million) were lawful permanent residents, 6% (2.2 million) were temporary lawful residents, and 23% (10.5 million) were unauthorized immigrants.
 The United States led the world in 
 for decades, admitting more refugees than the rest of the world combined.


English (specifically, 
) is the de facto 
 of the United States. Although there is no 
 at the federal level, some laws—such as 
—standardize English, and most states have declared English as the official language.
 Three states and four U.S. territories have recognized local or indigenous languages in addition to English, including Hawaii (
),
 Alaska (
),
 South Dakota (
),
 American Samoa (
), Puerto Rico (
), Guam (
), and the Northern Mariana Islands (
 and Chamorro). In Puerto Rico, Spanish is more widely spoken than English.


According to the 
, in 2010 some 229 million people (out of the total U.S. population of 308 million) spoke only English at home. More than 37 million spoke 
 at home, making it the second most commonly used language in the United States. Other languages spoken at home by one million people or more include 
 (2.8 million), 
 (1.6 million), 
 (1.4 million), 
 (1.3 million), 
 (1.1 million), and 
 (1 million).


The 
 in the United States, in terms of enrollment numbers from kindergarten through university 
, are Spanish (around 7.2 million students), French (1.5 million), and 
 (500,000). Other commonly taught languages include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


Religion in the United States (2022 
)


A large variety of faiths have historically flourished within the country. According to the 
 in 2017, the United States is more 
 than the median country; they ranked the United States the 32nd least religious country in the world.
 Until the 1990s, the country was a substantial 
 among other 
 countries: uniquely 
, although this has lessened significantly since then.
 Studies during the early 2020s found that about 81% of Americans believe in some conception of God, 45% report 
 on a daily basis, 41% report that religion plays a very important role in their lives, and 31% report attending religious services weekly or near weekly.
 58% of Americans report "seldom" or "never" attending religious services.
 

In a 2020 survey, about 64% of adults in the United States identified themselves as 
 making it the country with the 
.
 
 is the largest Christian religious grouping in the United States, accounting for around a third of all Americans. In the so-called 
, located primarily within the 
, socially conservative 
 plays a significant role culturally. By contrast, religion plays the least important role in 
 and the Western United States.


Another 6% claimed a non-Christian faith;
 the largest of which are 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 

Around 30% of Americans describe themselves as having 
.
 Membership in a house of worship fell from 70% in 1999 to 47% in 2020, much of the decline related to the number of Americans expressing no religious preference. Membership also fell among those who identified with a specific religious group.
 According to 
, trust in "the church or organized religion" has declined significantly since the 1970s.
 

The 
 of the U.S. Constitution guarantees the 
 of religion and forbids Congress from passing laws respecting its 
.


About 82% of Americans live in 
, including suburbs;
 about half of those reside in cities with populations over 50,000.
 In 2008, 273 
 had populations over 100,000, nine cities had more than one million residents, and four cities (
, 
, 
, and 
) had populations exceeding two million.
 Many U.S. metropolitan populations are growing rapidly, particularly in the South and West.


American 
 is operated by state and local governments and regulated by the 
 through restrictions on federal grants. In most states, children are required to attend school from the age of five or six (beginning with 
 or 
) until they turn 18 (generally bringing them through 
, the end of 
); some states allow students to leave school at 16 or 17.
 Of Americans 25 and older, 84.6% graduated from high school, 52.6% attended some college, 27.2% earned a 
, and 9.6% earned graduate degrees.
 The basic 
 rate is approximately 99%.


The United States has many private and public 
. The majority of the world's top 
 and 
, as listed by various ranking organizations, are in the United States.
 There are also local 
 with generally more open admission policies, shorter academic programs, and lower tuition.
 The U.S. spends more on education per student than any nation in the world,
 spending an average of $12,794 per year on public elementary and secondary school students in the 2016–2017 school year.
 As for 
 on higher education, the U.S. spends more per student than the 
 average, and more than all nations in combined public and private spending.
 Despite some student 
 programs in place,
 
 has increased by 102% in the last decade,
 and exceeded 1.7 trillion dollars as of 2022.


In a preliminary report, the 
 (CDC) announced that U.S. 
 at birth had dropped to 76.4 years in 2021 (73.2 years for men and 79.1 years for women), down 0.9 years from 2020. This was the second year of overall decline, and the chief causes listed were the 
 pandemic, accidents, drug overdoses, heart and liver disease, and suicides.
 Life expectancy was highest among Asians and Hispanics and lowest among Blacks and American Indian–Alaskan Native (
) peoples.
 Starting in 1998, the average life expectancy in the U.S. fell behind that of other wealthy industrialized countries, and Americans' "health disadvantage" gap has been increasing ever since.
 The U.S. also has one of the highest 
 rates among 
,
 and approximately one-third of the U.S. adult population is obese and another third is overweight.


In 2010, 
, 
, 
, 
, and traffic collisions caused the most years of life lost in the U.S. 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 caused the most years lost to disability. The most harmful 
 were poor diet, 
, obesity, 
, 
, 
, and 
. 
, 
, 
, 
, and falls caused the most additional years of life lost over their age-adjusted 1990 per-capita rates.
 
 and 
 rates in the U.S. are substantially higher than in other Western nations, especially among blacks and Hispanics.


The U.S. health care system far 
 that of any other nation, measured both in per capita spending and as a percentage of GDP but attains worse healthcare outcomes when compared to peer nations.
 The U.S., however, is a global leader in medical innovation. The United States is the only developed nation 
, and a 
.


Government-funded health care coverage for the poor (
, established in 1965) and for those age 65 and older (
, begun in 1966) is available to Americans who meet the programs' income or age qualifications. In 2010, former President Obama passed the 
 or ACA,
 which the CDC said that the law roughly halved the uninsured share of the population
 and multiple studies have concluded that ACA had reduced the mortality of enrollees.
 However, its legacy 
.


The United States is home to a 
 of ethnic groups, traditions, and values,
 and exerts major cultural influence 
.
 Aside from the Native American, 
, and 
 populations, nearly all Americans or their ancestors immigrated or were imported as slaves within the past five centuries.
 
 American culture is a 
 largely derived from the 
 with influences from many other sources, such as 
.
 

More recent immigration from 
 and especially 
 has added to a cultural mix that has been described as a homogenizing 
, and a heterogeneous 
, with immigrants contributing to, and often 
 into, mainstream American culture.
 Nevertheless, there is a high degree of social inequality related to 
 and 
.


Americans have traditionally 
 by a strong 
,
 competitiveness,
 and individualism,
 as well as a unifying belief in an "
" emphasizing liberty, 
, 
, democracy, 
, and a preference for limited government.
 Americans are extremely charitable by global standards: according to a 2016 study by the 
, Americans donated 1.44% of total GDP to charity, the 
 by a large margin.


The 
, or the perception that Americans enjoy high 
, plays a key role in attracting immigrants.
 Whether this perception is accurate has been a topic of debate.
 While mainstream culture holds that the United States is a 
,
 scholars identify significant differences between 
, affecting 
, language, and values.
 Americans tend to greatly value 
 achievement, but being 
 is promoted by some as a noble condition.


In the 18th and early 19th centuries, American art and literature took most of their cues from Europe, contributing to Western culture. Writers such as 
, 
, 
, and 
 established a distinctive American literary voice by the middle of the 19th century. 
 and poet 
 were major figures in the century's second half; 
, virtually unknown during her lifetime, is recognized as an essential American poet.


A work seen as capturing fundamental aspects of the national experience and character—such as 
's 
 (1851), Twain's 
 (1885), 
's 
 (1925) and 
's 
 (1960)—may be dubbed the "
."
 

Thirteen U.S. citizens have won the 
. 
, 
 and 
 are often named among the most influential writers of the 20th century.
  The 
 writers opened up new literary approaches, as have 
 authors such as 
, 
, and 
.


In the visual arts, the 
 was a mid-19th-century movement in the tradition of European 
. The 1913 
 in New York City, an exhibition of European 
, shocked the public and transformed the U.S. art scene.
 
, 
, and others experimented with new, individualistic styles. 

Major artistic movements such as the 
 of 
 and 
 and the 
 of 
 and 
 developed largely in the United States. The tide of modernism and then 
 has brought fame to American architects such as 
, 
, and 
.
 Americans have long been important in the modern artistic medium of 
, with major photographers including 
, 
, 
, and 
.


, a northern district of Los Angeles, California, is one of the leaders in motion picture production.
 The world's first commercial motion picture exhibition was given in New York City in 1894, using the 
.
 Since the early 20th century, the U.S. film industry has largely been based in and around Hollywood, although in the 21st century an increasing number of films are not made there, and film companies have been subject to the forces of globalization.
 The 
, popularly known as the Oscars, have been held annually by the 
 since 1929,
 and the 
 have been held annually since January 1944.


Director 
, an American 
 during the 
 period, was central to the development of 
, and producer/entrepreneur 
 was a leader in both 
 and movie 
.
 Directors such as 
 redefined the image of the American Old West, and, like others such as 
, broadened the possibilities of cinema with location shooting. The industry enjoyed its golden years, in what is commonly referred to as the "
", from the early sound period until the early 1960s,
 with screen actors such as 
 and 
 becoming iconic figures.
 In the 1970s, "
" or the "Hollywood Renaissance"
 was defined by grittier films influenced by French and Italian realist pictures of the 
.


Theater in the United States derives from the old European theatrical tradition and has been heavily influenced by the 
.
 The central hub of the American theater scene has been 
, with its divisions of 
, 
, and 
.
 Many movie and television stars have gotten their big break working in New York productions. Outside New York City, many cities have professional 
 that produce their own seasons, with some works being produced regionally with hopes of eventually moving to New York. The biggest-budget theatrical productions are 
. U.S. theater also has an active 
 culture, which relies mainly on local volunteers who may not be actively pursuing a theatrical career.


 encompasses numerous music genres, variously known as traditional music, traditional 
, contemporary folk music, or roots music. Many traditional songs have been sung within the same family or folk group for generations, and sometimes trace back to such origins as the 
, 
, or Africa.


Among America's earliest composers was a man named 
 who, born in Boston, composed patriotic hymns in the 1770s;
 Billings was a part of the 
, who dominated American music during its earliest stages. 
 was the most prominent composer before the Civil War. From the mid- to late 1800s, 
 of the late 
 composed numerous military songs—
—and is regarded as one of America's greatest composers.


The rhythmic and lyrical styles of 
 have significantly influenced 
 at large, distinguishing it from European and African traditions. Elements from folk idioms such as the 
 and what is known as 
 were adopted and transformed into 
 with global audiences. 
 was developed by innovators such as 
 and 
 early in the 20th century. 
 developed in the 1920s, and 
 in the 1940s.


 and 
 were among the pioneers of 
 in the mid-1950s. Rock bands such as 
, the 
, and 
 are among the 
 in worldwide sales.
 In the 1960s, 
 emerged from the 
 to become one of America's most celebrated songwriters.
 Mid-20th-century American pop stars such as 
, 
,
 and Elvis Presley became global celebrities,
 as have artists of the late 20th century such as 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


The four major broadcasters in the U.S. are the 
 (NBC), 
 (CBS), 
 (ABC), and 
 (FOX). The four major broadcast 
 are all commercial entities. 
 offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of niches.
 As of 2021
, about 83% of Americans over age 12 listen to 
, while about 41% listen to 
.
 As of September 30, 2014
, there are 15,433 licensed full-power radio stations in the U.S. according to the U.S. 
 (FCC).
 Much of the public radio broadcasting is supplied by 
, incorporated in February 1970 under the 
.


Well-known U.S. newspapers include 
, 
, and 
.
 More than 800 publications are produced in Spanish, the second most commonly used language in the United States behind English.
 With very few exceptions, all the newspapers in the U.S. are privately owned, either by large chains such as 
 or 
, which own dozens or even hundreds of newspapers; by small chains that own a handful of papers; or, in a situation that is increasingly rare, by individuals or families. Major cities often have 
 to complement the mainstream daily papers, such as New York City's 
 or Los Angeles' 
. The five most popular websites used in the U.S. are 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


The 
 is the world's 2nd largest by revenue.
 It generated $90 billion in annual economic output in 2020. Furthermore, the video game industry contributed $12.6 billion in federal, state, and municipal taxes annually.
 Some of the largest video game companies like 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 are based in the United States.
 Some of the most popular and best selling video games like 
, 
 and 
 are made by American 
.
 The American video gaming business is still a significant employer. More than 143,000 individuals are employed directly and indirectly by video game companies throughout 50 states. The national compensation for direct workers is US$2.9 billion, or an average wage of US$121,000.


Early settlers were introduced by Native Americans to such indigenous, non-European foods as turkey, 
, 
, 
, and 
. They and later immigrants combined these with foods they had known, such as 
,
 beef, and milk to create a distinctive American cuisine.
 Homegrown foods are part of a shared national menu on one of America's most popular holidays, 
, when many Americans make or purchase traditional foods to celebrate the occasion.


The American 
 industry, the world's largest,
 pioneered the 
 format in the 1940s.
 Characteristic American dishes such as 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 derive from the recipes of various immigrants.
 
 dishes such as 
 and 
 and 
 dishes freely adapted from 
 sources are widely consumed.


Americans drink three times as much coffee as tea.
 Marketing by U.S. industries is largely responsible for making orange juice and milk standard 
.


The most popular sports in the U.S. are 
, 
, 
 and 
.


While most major U.S. sports such as 
 and 
 have evolved out of European practices, 
, 
, 
, and 
 are American inventions, some of which have become popular worldwide.
 
 and 
 arose from Native American and Native Hawaiian activities that predate Western contact.
 The market for 
 in the United States is roughly $69 billion, roughly 50% larger than that of all of Europe, the Middle East, and Africa combined.


American football is by several measures the most popular spectator sport in the United States;
 the 
 (NFL) has the highest average attendance of any sports league in the world, and the 
 is watched by tens of millions globally.
 Baseball has been regarded as the U.S. 
 since the late 19th century, with 
 being the top league. Basketball and 
 are the country's next two most popular professional team sports, with the top leagues being the 
 and the 
. The most-watched 
 in the U.S. are 
 and 
, particularly 
 and 
.


Eight 
 have taken place in the United States. The 
 in 
, 
, were the first-ever Olympic Games held outside of Europe.
 The Olympic Games will be held in the U.S. for a ninth time when 
 hosts the 
. As of 2021
, the United States has won 2,629 medals at the 
, more than any other country, and 330 in the 
, the second most behind Norway.
 In 
, the 
 qualified for 
 and the 
 has 
 the 
 four times.
 The United States hosted the 
 and will host the 
 along with 
 and 
. On the 
 level, earnings for the member institutions exceed $1 billion annually,
 and 
 and 
 attract large audiences, as the 
 is one of the most watched sporting events.




 





 is a genus of 
 in family 
. Species of 
 are 
, specialized on a relatively small number of plant species. 

Their host plants include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
, although mallows are the most common and likely ancestral host plant for the whole genus. Its tribe is 
.

In the 
, 
 is considered the "cactus bee" as it feeds almost exclusively on a number of Sonoran Desert cactus species, its life cycle revolving around the flowering of the native species of cacti.


These 42 species belong to the genus 
.




This 
 article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.

				Pages for logged out editors 

			
The 
, 
 
 or 
, was a 
 held in 
 in 1909 publicizing the development of the 
. It was originally planned for 1907 to mark the 10th anniversary of the 
, but the organizers learned of the 
 being held that same year and rescheduled.

The fairgrounds became the campus of the 
.

Godfrey Chealander proposed the idea for the fair. Chealander was then Grand Secretary of the 
, was involved in the 
 exhibit at the 1905 
 in 
, 
. Originally, he pitched William Sheffield of the Alaska Club and James A. Wood, city editor of the 
 on the idea of a permanent exhibit in Seattle about Alaska. This merged with Wood's desire for an exposition to rival Portland. They soon gained the backing of 
 publisher 
—remarkably, for the time, without gaining the opposition of the rival 
.
 Among other early proponents of the exposition was John Edward Chilberg, one of a line of prominent Seattle merchants in the 
 family, who was president of the Alaska Club, and was then given the title of president of the Exposition.


 proposed that the exposition be held on the then largely forested campus of the 
, which in 1905 had exactly three buildings and little deliberate landscaping. At the time, this was considered rather far from the center of town, but Meany eventually sold the others involved on the idea that the forested campus could, itself, be an attraction for out-of-town visitors and that the 
 ride from downtown would not be an obstacle to attendance. Of course, he was also highly aware of what the landscaping and structures could do for the campus.


The 
 endorsed the fair, with the proviso that it would produce at least four permanent buildings, and that any state monetary contribution would be focused mainly on those buildings. 
 (the county in which Seattle is located) stepped up with US$300,000 for a 
 exhibit—the largest 
 ever built—and $78,000 for other exhibits. Because the original Klondike gold strikes had been in 
, the concept soon evolved to an "Alaska-Yukon Exposition"; later, at the behest of the 
, the "Pacific" theme was also added to emphasize the Oriental trade.
 The Exposition became known as the "A-Y-P" for short


Although the fair almost certainly could have been ready for 1907, it was postponed so as not to conflict with the 
. This turned out to be good fortune for Seattle, because 1907 proved to be a bad year for the economy. If the exposition had been held that year it almost certainly would have been a financial failure, rather than the success it was in 1909.


The 
 of Brookline, Massachusetts, were selected to plan the Exposition; the firm was already involved in planning parks and parkways for the City of Seattle. 
 visited Seattle in October 1906 and saw the dominant form of 
 toward the southeast. He selected the mountain as the focus of the primary axis of the Exposition. This axis later became the 
 of the University of Washington campus.

The principal landscape architect for the fair was the Olmsted firm's 
. His design centered on a long pool with a series of short waterfalls along Rainier Vista.
 
 firm, Howard and Galloway, based in San Francisco, was chosen as supervising architects for the Exposition buildings. They designed several buildings and supervised construction of those designed by other architects.

The fairgrounds were entirely ready for the June 1, 1909, opening.


The only foreign countries to erect entire buildings at the fair were 
 and Canada, but their presence was enough to validate the "Pacific" theme along with the US territory of 
 and the 
, recently ceded to the US by Spain. Other foreign countries were represented on a smaller scale. The very popular King County exhibit included a scale model of the 
 at nearby 
 and 
 of several Seattle scenes, the originals of which were only a trolley ride away. The Woman's Building emphasized the role of women in pioneering the 
 and in current charity work. The Pay Streak was Seattle's answer to Chicago's 
 and featured games of chance and amusements. There was also a reenactment of the 
 naval 
 (the Battle of 
 and 
).


The Forestry Building.

The Hoo-Hoo House and Bastion, which became the UW Faculty Lounge until torn down and replaced mid-century.

Display of 
 fruits.

Installing the statue of 
 that remains on the University of Washington campus

The 
 style 
 gate at the South entrance

The gates opened at 8:30 a.m. on June 1, and crowds entered immediately. At 9:30 a.m., attendees watched performances by military bands from the Army and the Navy.  Many sat in the fair's amphitheater, awaiting a signal scheduled to be given in Washington, D.C.  At 3 p.m. East Coast time (noon in Seattle), in the East Room of the White House, President Taft sent the signal.  He "opened...the Exposition...by touching a gold [telegraph] key, studded with gold nuggets taken from the first mine opened in the Klondike region."
 The telegraphic spark that Taft sent was received by telegraphers at the fairgrounds; as soon as it arrived, a gong was struck five times, a large American flag was unfurled, and there was a 21-gun salute, while other demonstrations of pageantry announced the official opening of the fair.


Opening Day, June 1, was declared a city holiday, and 80,000 people attended.
 Attendance was even higher—117,013—on "Seattle Day".
 Other big draws were days dedicated to various ethnic groups, fraternal organizations, and U.S. states.
 By the time the fair closed on October 16, more than 3,700,000 people had visited.

The fair had its own publicity department, and it used newspapers and magazines to promote the upcoming exhibition well in advance. In early 1908, Seattle newspapers reported that the publicity department was already showing positive results and the fair was earning many favorable mentions in publications all over the United States.
 The publicists stressed that this exhibition would be far better organized than 1907's 
, and would feature impressive entertainment. But what many newspapers found interesting was the assertion that this next World's Fair would not require any financial assistance or subsidies from the U.S. government; the only request made by the fair's directors was that the United States erect buildings and exhibits like any other country.


Throughout 1908, as each new exhibit was built and the fair gradually began to take shape, publicity about the fair's progress was sent out, and frequently printed, nearly verbatim, from the press releases. For example, the 
 in 
, 
, printed a story about how the fair would have motor boat races:  the article noted that the pavilion for the event was being built on "one of the prettiest spots on the exposition's shoreline." The article praised Puget Sound for being an area perfect for motor boating enthusiasts, and concluded by saying, "The climate is such that motor boating can be enjoyed all the year round."


By early 1909, the focus turned to who was going to attend, as many local newspapers in distant locations wrote articles about residents of their state who planned to make the trip out to Seattle. Also helpful was the fact that several major newspaper conventions were scheduled for the west coast, and the editors were said to be very interested in visiting the fair.
  The fair's organizers were also able to benefit from advertisements placed in newspapers by the railroads, which encouraged people to travel by rail to Seattle. One such ad, for the Great Northern Railway, promoted the train as the best way to enjoy a scenic trip: "an attractive route over the Rockies and through the Cascades" before finally arriving at what was sure to be "the World's Most Beautiful Fair."


The primary physical legacy of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition is the planning framework from the fair which continues to shape the University of Washington campus. The Rainier Vista and 
, the focus of the A-Y-P, are today the central focus of the Science Quadrangle of the university's overall plan.

Although most of the Exposition's buildings were designed as temporary structures, intended to last only for the duration of the fair, some were more permanent. The Fine Arts Palace was designed by Howard and Galloway as a chemistry building. It was used during the A-Y-P for the exhibit of art. After the Exposition was over, chemistry lab tables and other furnishings were moved in and it became the University's primary facility for teaching chemistry. The building was named Bagley Hall (after 
) and retained that name until 1937, when a new chemistry building named Bagley Hall opened. The older building then became the home of Architecture and Physiology. The building survives today, albeit with extensive renovation and restoration, and is known as Architecture Hall.

The A-Y-P Women's Building also survives. During the fair it housed exhibits related to women. Today the building is named Cunningham Hall (after 
), one of only a few buildings on the University of Washington campus named for women. During the Exposition itself the building was clad in stucco; today it is faced in wood siding. The building now houses various educational and other programs related to women.

Other buildings from the A-Y-P survived for a time, but were subsequently demolished as the university grew. The Forestry Building was demolished mid-century after the natural logs of the structure proved difficult to maintain and few alternative uses for the structure were found. It stood on the site of the current 
 (HUB). The original Meany Hall, the AYP Auditorium Hall, was damaged by an 
 and subsequently demolished. Another example is the Hoo-Hoo-House, designed by architect 
, a clubhouse with reception spaces constructed for the 
, a lumbermen's fraternity. After the fair, this building served as the faculty club until it was replaced in 1958–60 by the current faculty club.

Another legacy of the fair was the enhanced status of exposition president J. E. Chilberg. Although a respected banker, Chilberg had never really been one of the city's elite. He was drafted into his position with the fair simply as a man who was known to be good at getting things done, but without consideration by the city's elite that they had just made an outsider into something tantamount to royalty for the duration of a social season. Suddenly, any party at their 
 home became a major event in the social calendar. He and his wife found themselves dining with a close relative of the 
 and hosting a 
 ambassador.


The 
, originally erected for the fair, now stands in 
.

, founder of 
, stated that it was during the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition when he saw a manned flying machine for the first time and became fascinated with aircraft.

Because the Exposition buildings were built with non-union labor, various unions protested against the exposition in actions ranging from pamphleteering to boycotts. The Central Labor Council organized a protest march outside the grounds on 
. The 
 editorialized that the Exposition was, "a great fantastic monument to the brutal avarice of the capitalist class."


A month-old orphaned boy named Ernest was raffled away as a prize. Although a winning ticket was drawn, nobody claimed the prize. The ultimate destiny of the child was still being investigated in 2009.


Other human exhibits included displays presenting 
 people from the Philippines as dog-eating, primitive people; the "Alaskan Siberians — Eskimos"; and a Chinese village depicting 
 and recounting the recent 
.
 The Igorot exhibit spawned a letter of protest to the 
 signed by over 100 Filipino merchant marines, although some local resident Filipinos responded to the letter by defending the exhibit.


Premature babies were also displayed in French physician 
's 
, decades before such systems were commonplace in hospitals. This display was not unique to the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition; babies had been displayed in incubators since the 
 (and Seattle itself had seen at least two such exhibits before the A-Y-P Exposition
). Given the robustness of the infants seen in photographs, there is some question as to whether these infants actually required extra care or if they were simply used for profit. Particular to this exhibit was a Baby Incubator Cafe which is seen in some photos, although historians are unsure if this was an actual cafe or rather a place to view babies feeding. At the time there was little in the way of protest from either fair-goers or physicians. In fact there was already a seasonal incubator exhibit at Luna Park in West Seattle, the Infant Electrobator concession. The babies were mentioned by name in the newspaper during their stay at the exposition and their medical state followed throughout. A specific point of interest was the range in ethnicity of the infants. No deaths were experienced amongst the babies at the exhibit.


The year 2009 was the centennial of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition. The City and University held various activities to celebrate this anniversary.

A documentary was produced by 
 called "AYP-Seattle's Forgotten World's Fair" for 
.


On July 4, 2009, a group of 12 cyclists set off from 
, on a 1,000 mile bike ride to Seattle, Washington, to support the disease 
. The ride, titled 
, was a centennial of the 1909 adventure of Vic McDaniel and Ray Francisco who traveled on bicycles to the Exposition. The ride ended at the Drumheller Fountain, in the center of Frosh Pond on the campus of the University of Washington on July 16, 2009. Drumheller Fountain is one of the last known remnants from the 1909 fair.

, 
, or 
 is 
 used for 
 from 
.
 Web scraping software may directly access the 
 using the 
 or a web browser. While web scraping can be done manually by a software user, the term typically refers to automated processes implemented using a 
 or 
. It is a form of copying in which specific data is gathered and copied from the web, typically into a central local 
 or spreadsheet, for later 
 or 
.

Scraping a web page involves fetching it and extracting from it. Fetching is the downloading of a page (which a browser does when a user views a page). Therefore, web crawling is a main component of web scraping, to fetch pages for later processing. Once fetched, extraction can take place. The content of a page may be 
, searched and reformatted, and its data copied into a spreadsheet or loaded into a database. Web scrapers typically take something out of a page, to make use of it for another purpose somewhere else. An example would be finding and copying names and telephone numbers, companies and their URLs, or e-mail addresses to a list (contact scraping).

As well as 
, web scraping is used as a component of applications used for 
, 
 and 
, online price change monitoring and 
, product review scraping (to watch the competition), gathering real estate listings, weather data monitoring, 
, research, tracking online presence and reputation, 
, and 
.

 are built using text-based mark-up languages (
 and 
), and frequently contain a wealth of useful data in text form. However, most web pages are designed for human 
 and not for ease of automated use. As a result, specialized tools and software have been developed to facilitate the scraping of web pages.

Newer forms of web scraping involve monitoring data feeds from web servers.  For example, 
 is commonly used as a transport storage mechanism between the client and the web server.

There are methods that some websites use to prevent web scraping, such as detecting and disallowing bots from crawling (viewing) their pages. In response, there are web scraping systems that rely on using techniques in 
 parsing, 
 and 
 to simulate human browsing to enable gathering web page content for offline parsing.

The history of web scraping dates back nearly to the time when the World Wide Web was born.

Web scraping is the process of automatically mining data or collecting information from the World Wide Web. It is a field with active developments sharing a common goal with the 
 vision, an ambitious initiative that still requires breakthroughs in text processing, semantic understanding, artificial intelligence and 
.

The simplest form of web scraping is manually copying and pasting data from a web page into a text file or spreadsheet. Sometimes even the best web-scraping technology cannot replace a human's manual examination and copy-and-paste, and sometimes this may be the only workable solution when the websites for scraping explicitly set up barriers to prevent machine automation.

A simple yet powerful approach to extract information from web pages can be based on the UNIX 
 command or 
-matching facilities of programming languages (for instance 
 or 
).

 and 
 can be retrieved by posting HTTP requests to the remote web server using 
.

Many websites have large collections of pages generated dynamically from an underlying structured source like a database. Data of the same category are typically encoded into similar pages by a common script or template. In data mining, a program that detects such templates in a particular information source, extracts its content and translates it into a relational form, is called a 
. Wrapper generation algorithms assume that input pages of a wrapper induction system conform to a common template and that they can be easily identified in terms of a URL common scheme.
 Moreover, some 
 query languages, such as 
 and the HTQL, can be used to parse HTML pages and to retrieve and transform page content.

By embedding a full-fledged web browser, such as the 
 or the 
 browser control, programs can retrieve the dynamic content generated by client-side scripts. These browser controls also parse web pages into a DOM tree, based on which programs can retrieve parts of the pages. Languages such as 
 can be used to parse the resulting DOM tree.

There are several companies that have developed vertical specific harvesting platforms. These platforms create and monitor a multitude of "bots" for specific verticals with no "man in the loop" (no direct human involvement), and no work related to a specific target site. The preparation involves establishing the knowledge base for the entire vertical and then the platform creates the bots automatically. The platform's robustness is measured by the quality of the information it retrieves (usually number of fields) and its scalability (how quick it can scale up to hundreds or thousands of sites). This scalability is mostly used to target the 
 of sites that common aggregators find complicated or too labor-intensive to harvest content from.

The pages being scraped may embrace 
 or semantic markups and annotations, which can be used to locate specific data snippets. If the annotations are embedded in the pages, as 
 does, this technique can be viewed as a special case of DOM parsing. In another case, the annotations, organized into a semantic layer,
 are stored and managed separately from the web pages, so the scrapers can retrieve data schema and instructions from this layer before scraping the pages.

There are efforts using 
 and 
 that attempt to identify and extract information from web pages by interpreting pages visually as a human being might.


There are many software tools available that can be used to customize web-scraping solutions. This software may attempt to automatically recognize the data structure of a page or provide a recording interface that removes the necessity to manually write web-scraping code, or some scripting functions that can be used to extract and transform content, and database interfaces that can store the scraped data in local databases. Some web scraping software can also be used to extract data from an API directly.

The legality of web scraping varies across the world. In general, web scraping may be against the 
 of some websites, but the enforceability of these terms is unclear.


In the United States, website owners can use three major 
 to prevent undesired web scraping: (1) copyright infringement (compilation), (2) violation of the 
 ("CFAA"), and (3) 
.
 However, the effectiveness of these claims relies upon meeting various criteria, and the case law is still evolving. For example, with regard to copyright, while outright duplication of original expression will in many cases be illegal, in the United States the courts ruled in 
 that duplication of facts is allowable.

U.S. courts have acknowledged that users of "scrapers" or "robots" may be held liable for committing 
,
 which involves a computer system itself being considered personal property upon which the user of a scraper is trespassing. The best known of these cases, 
, resulted in an injunction ordering Bidder's Edge to stop accessing, collecting, and indexing auctions from the eBay web site. This case involved automatic placing of bids, known as 
. However, in order to succeed on a claim of trespass to 
, the 
 must demonstrate that the 
 intentionally and without authorization interfered with the plaintiff's possessory interest in the computer system and that the defendant's unauthorized use caused damage to the plaintiff. Not all cases of web spidering brought before the courts have been considered trespass to chattels.


One of the first major tests of 
 involved 
 (AA), and a firm called FareChase.
 AA successfully obtained an 
 from a Texas trial court, stopping FareChase from selling software that enables users to compare online fares if the software also searches AA's website. The airline argued that FareChase's websearch software trespassed on AA's servers when it collected the publicly available data. FareChase filed an appeal in March 2003. By June, FareChase and AA agreed to settle and the appeal was dropped.


 has also challenged screen-scraping practices, and has involved both FareChase and another firm, Outtask, in a legal claim. Southwest Airlines charged that the screen-scraping is Illegal since it is an example of "Computer Fraud and Abuse" and has led to "Damage and Loss" and "Unauthorized Access" of Southwest's site. It also constitutes "Interference with Business Relations", "Trespass", and "Harmful Access by Computer". They also claimed that screen-scraping constitutes what is legally known as "Misappropriation and Unjust Enrichment", as well as being a breach of the web site's user agreement. Outtask denied all these claims, claiming that the prevailing law, in this case, should be 
 and that under copyright, the pieces of information being scraped would not be subject to copyright protection. Although the cases were never resolved in the 
, FareChase was eventually shuttered by parent company 
, and Outtask was purchased by travel expense company Concur.

In 2012, a startup called 3Taps scraped classified housing ads from Craigslist. Craigslist sent 3Taps a cease-and-desist letter and blocked their IP addresses and later sued, in 
. The court held that the cease-and-desist letter and IP blocking was sufficient for Craigslist to properly claim that 3Taps had violated the 
.

Although these are early scraping decisions, and the theories of liability are not uniform, it is difficult to ignore a pattern emerging that the courts are prepared to protect proprietary content on commercial sites from uses which are undesirable to the owners of such sites. However, the degree of protection for such content is not settled and will depend on the type of access made by the scraper, the amount of information accessed and copied, the degree to which the access adversely affects the site owner's system and the types and manner of prohibitions on such conduct.


While the law in this area becomes more settled, entities contemplating using scraping programs to access a public web site should also consider whether such action is authorized by reviewing the terms of use and other terms or notices posted on or made available through the site. In a 2010 ruling in the 
 In the United States district court for the eastern district of Virginia, the court ruled that the terms of use should be brought to the users' attention In order for a 
 contract or license to be enforced.
 In a 2014 case, filed in the 
,
 e-commerce site 
 objected to the Pinterest-like shopping aggregator Resultly's 'scraping of QVC's site for real-time pricing data. QVC alleges that Resultly "excessively crawled" QVC's retail site (allegedly sending 200-300 search requests to QVC's website per minute, sometimes to up to 36,000 requests per minute) which caused QVC's site to crash for two days, resulting in lost sales for QVC.
 QVC's complaint alleges that the defendant disguised its web crawler to mask its source IP address and thus prevented QVC from quickly repairing the problem. This is a particularly interesting scraping case because QVC is seeking damages for the unavailability of their website, which QVC claims was caused by Resultly.

In the plaintiff's web site during the period of this trial, the terms of use link are displayed among all the links of the site, at the bottom of the page as most sites on the internet. This ruling contradicts the Irish ruling described below. The court also rejected the plaintiff's argument that the browse-wrap restrictions were enforceable in view of Virginia's adoption of the Uniform Computer Information Transactions Act (UCITA)—a uniform law that many believed was in favor on common browse-wrap contracting practices.


In 
, a district court ruled in 2012 that Power Ventures could not scrape Facebook pages on behalf of a Facebook user. The case is on appeal, and the 
 filed a brief in 2015 asking that it be overturned.
 In 
, a court in the US held Meltwater liable for scraping and republishing news information from the Associated Press, but a court in the United Kingdom held in favor of Meltwater.

 collects and distributes a significant number of publicly available web pages without being considered to be in violation of copyright laws.

In February 2006, the 
 (Copenhagen) ruled that systematic crawling, indexing, and deep linking by portal site ofir.dk of estate site Home.dk does not conflict with Danish law or the database directive of the European Union.


In a February 2010 case complicated by matters of jurisdiction, Ireland's High Court delivered a verdict that illustrates the 
 state of developing case law. In the case of 
, Ireland's High Court ruled 
 "
" agreement to be legally binding. In contrast to the findings of the United States District Court Eastern District of Virginia and those of the Danish Maritime and Commercial Court, Justice 
 ruled that the hyperlink to Ryanair's terms and conditions was plainly visible, and that placing the onus on the user to agree to terms and conditions in order to gain access to online services is sufficient to comprise a contractual relationship.
 The decision is under appeal in Ireland's Supreme Court.


On April 30, 2020, the French Data Protection Authority (CNIL) released new guidelines on web scraping.
 The CNIL guidelines made it clear that publicly available data is still personal data and cannot be repurposed without the knowledge of the person to whom that data belongs.


In Australia, the 
 outlaws some forms of web harvesting, although this only applies to email addresses.


Leaving a few cases dealing with IPR infringement, Indian courts have not expressly ruled on the legality of web scraping. However, since all common forms of electronic contracts are enforceable in India, violating the terms of use prohibiting data scraping will be a violation of the contract law. It will also violate the 
, which penalizes unauthorized access to a computer resource or extracting data from a computer resource.

The administrator of a website can use various measures to stop or slow a bot. Some techniques include:


				Pages for logged out editors 

			
The 
, 
 
 or 
, was a 
 held in 
 in 1909 publicizing the development of the 
. It was originally planned for 1907 to mark the 10th anniversary of the 
, but the organizers learned of the 
 being held that same year and rescheduled.

The fairgrounds became the campus of the 
.

Godfrey Chealander proposed the idea for the fair. Chealander was then Grand Secretary of the 
, was involved in the 
 exhibit at the 1905 
 in 
, 
. Originally, he pitched William Sheffield of the Alaska Club and James A. Wood, city editor of the 
 on the idea of a permanent exhibit in Seattle about Alaska. This merged with Wood's desire for an exposition to rival Portland. They soon gained the backing of 
 publisher 
—remarkably, for the time, without gaining the opposition of the rival 
.
 Among other early proponents of the exposition was John Edward Chilberg, one of a line of prominent Seattle merchants in the 
 family, who was president of the Alaska Club, and was then given the title of president of the Exposition.


 proposed that the exposition be held on the then largely forested campus of the 
, which in 1905 had exactly three buildings and little deliberate landscaping. At the time, this was considered rather far from the center of town, but Meany eventually sold the others involved on the idea that the forested campus could, itself, be an attraction for out-of-town visitors and that the 
 ride from downtown would not be an obstacle to attendance. Of course, he was also highly aware of what the landscaping and structures could do for the campus.


The 
 endorsed the fair, with the proviso that it would produce at least four permanent buildings, and that any state monetary contribution would be focused mainly on those buildings. 
 (the county in which Seattle is located) stepped up with US$300,000 for a 
 exhibit—the largest 
 ever built—and $78,000 for other exhibits. Because the original Klondike gold strikes had been in 
, the concept soon evolved to an "Alaska-Yukon Exposition"; later, at the behest of the 
, the "Pacific" theme was also added to emphasize the Oriental trade.
 The Exposition became known as the "A-Y-P" for short


Although the fair almost certainly could have been ready for 1907, it was postponed so as not to conflict with the 
. This turned out to be good fortune for Seattle, because 1907 proved to be a bad year for the economy. If the exposition had been held that year it almost certainly would have been a financial failure, rather than the success it was in 1909.


The 
 of Brookline, Massachusetts, were selected to plan the Exposition; the firm was already involved in planning parks and parkways for the City of Seattle. 
 visited Seattle in October 1906 and saw the dominant form of 
 toward the southeast. He selected the mountain as the focus of the primary axis of the Exposition. This axis later became the 
 of the University of Washington campus.

The principal landscape architect for the fair was the Olmsted firm's 
. His design centered on a long pool with a series of short waterfalls along Rainier Vista.
 
 firm, Howard and Galloway, based in San Francisco, was chosen as supervising architects for the Exposition buildings. They designed several buildings and supervised construction of those designed by other architects.

The fairgrounds were entirely ready for the June 1, 1909, opening.


The only foreign countries to erect entire buildings at the fair were 
 and Canada, but their presence was enough to validate the "Pacific" theme along with the US territory of 
 and the 
, recently ceded to the US by Spain. Other foreign countries were represented on a smaller scale. The very popular King County exhibit included a scale model of the 
 at nearby 
 and 
 of several Seattle scenes, the originals of which were only a trolley ride away. The Woman's Building emphasized the role of women in pioneering the 
 and in current charity work. The Pay Streak was Seattle's answer to Chicago's 
 and featured games of chance and amusements. There was also a reenactment of the 
 naval 
 (the Battle of 
 and 
).


The Forestry Building.

The Hoo-Hoo House and Bastion, which became the UW Faculty Lounge until torn down and replaced mid-century.

Display of 
 fruits.

Installing the statue of 
 that remains on the University of Washington campus

The 
 style 
 gate at the South entrance

The gates opened at 8:30 a.m. on June 1, and crowds entered immediately. At 9:30 a.m., attendees watched performances by military bands from the Army and the Navy.  Many sat in the fair's amphitheater, awaiting a signal scheduled to be given in Washington, D.C.  At 3 p.m. East Coast time (noon in Seattle), in the East Room of the White House, President Taft sent the signal.  He "opened...the Exposition...by touching a gold [telegraph] key, studded with gold nuggets taken from the first mine opened in the Klondike region."
 The telegraphic spark that Taft sent was received by telegraphers at the fairgrounds; as soon as it arrived, a gong was struck five times, a large American flag was unfurled, and there was a 21-gun salute, while other demonstrations of pageantry announced the official opening of the fair.


Opening Day, June 1, was declared a city holiday, and 80,000 people attended.
 Attendance was even higher—117,013—on "Seattle Day".
 Other big draws were days dedicated to various ethnic groups, fraternal organizations, and U.S. states.
 By the time the fair closed on October 16, more than 3,700,000 people had visited.

The fair had its own publicity department, and it used newspapers and magazines to promote the upcoming exhibition well in advance. In early 1908, Seattle newspapers reported that the publicity department was already showing positive results and the fair was earning many favorable mentions in publications all over the United States.
 The publicists stressed that this exhibition would be far better organized than 1907's 
, and would feature impressive entertainment. But what many newspapers found interesting was the assertion that this next World's Fair would not require any financial assistance or subsidies from the U.S. government; the only request made by the fair's directors was that the United States erect buildings and exhibits like any other country.


Throughout 1908, as each new exhibit was built and the fair gradually began to take shape, publicity about the fair's progress was sent out, and frequently printed, nearly verbatim, from the press releases. For example, the 
 in 
, 
, printed a story about how the fair would have motor boat races:  the article noted that the pavilion for the event was being built on "one of the prettiest spots on the exposition's shoreline." The article praised Puget Sound for being an area perfect for motor boating enthusiasts, and concluded by saying, "The climate is such that motor boating can be enjoyed all the year round."


By early 1909, the focus turned to who was going to attend, as many local newspapers in distant locations wrote articles about residents of their state who planned to make the trip out to Seattle. Also helpful was the fact that several major newspaper conventions were scheduled for the west coast, and the editors were said to be very interested in visiting the fair.
  The fair's organizers were also able to benefit from advertisements placed in newspapers by the railroads, which encouraged people to travel by rail to Seattle. One such ad, for the Great Northern Railway, promoted the train as the best way to enjoy a scenic trip: "an attractive route over the Rockies and through the Cascades" before finally arriving at what was sure to be "the World's Most Beautiful Fair."


The primary physical legacy of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition is the planning framework from the fair which continues to shape the University of Washington campus. The Rainier Vista and 
, the focus of the A-Y-P, are today the central focus of the Science Quadrangle of the university's overall plan.

Although most of the Exposition's buildings were designed as temporary structures, intended to last only for the duration of the fair, some were more permanent. The Fine Arts Palace was designed by Howard and Galloway as a chemistry building. It was used during the A-Y-P for the exhibit of art. After the Exposition was over, chemistry lab tables and other furnishings were moved in and it became the University's primary facility for teaching chemistry. The building was named Bagley Hall (after 
) and retained that name until 1937, when a new chemistry building named Bagley Hall opened. The older building then became the home of Architecture and Physiology. The building survives today, albeit with extensive renovation and restoration, and is known as Architecture Hall.

The A-Y-P Women's Building also survives. During the fair it housed exhibits related to women. Today the building is named Cunningham Hall (after 
), one of only a few buildings on the University of Washington campus named for women. During the Exposition itself the building was clad in stucco; today it is faced in wood siding. The building now houses various educational and other programs related to women.

Other buildings from the A-Y-P survived for a time, but were subsequently demolished as the university grew. The Forestry Building was demolished mid-century after the natural logs of the structure proved difficult to maintain and few alternative uses for the structure were found. It stood on the site of the current 
 (HUB). The original Meany Hall, the AYP Auditorium Hall, was damaged by an 
 and subsequently demolished. Another example is the Hoo-Hoo-House, designed by architect 
, a clubhouse with reception spaces constructed for the 
, a lumbermen's fraternity. After the fair, this building served as the faculty club until it was replaced in 1958–60 by the current faculty club.

Another legacy of the fair was the enhanced status of exposition president J. E. Chilberg. Although a respected banker, Chilberg had never really been one of the city's elite. He was drafted into his position with the fair simply as a man who was known to be good at getting things done, but without consideration by the city's elite that they had just made an outsider into something tantamount to royalty for the duration of a social season. Suddenly, any party at their 
 home became a major event in the social calendar. He and his wife found themselves dining with a close relative of the 
 and hosting a 
 ambassador.


The 
, originally erected for the fair, now stands in 
.

, founder of 
, stated that it was during the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition when he saw a manned flying machine for the first time and became fascinated with aircraft.

Because the Exposition buildings were built with non-union labor, various unions protested against the exposition in actions ranging from pamphleteering to boycotts. The Central Labor Council organized a protest march outside the grounds on 
. The 
 editorialized that the Exposition was, "a great fantastic monument to the brutal avarice of the capitalist class."


A month-old orphaned boy named Ernest was raffled away as a prize. Although a winning ticket was drawn, nobody claimed the prize. The ultimate destiny of the child was still being investigated in 2009.


Other human exhibits included displays presenting 
 people from the Philippines as dog-eating, primitive people; the "Alaskan Siberians — Eskimos"; and a Chinese village depicting 
 and recounting the recent 
.
 The Igorot exhibit spawned a letter of protest to the 
 signed by over 100 Filipino merchant marines, although some local resident Filipinos responded to the letter by defending the exhibit.


Premature babies were also displayed in French physician 
's 
, decades before such systems were commonplace in hospitals. This display was not unique to the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition; babies had been displayed in incubators since the 
 (and Seattle itself had seen at least two such exhibits before the A-Y-P Exposition
). Given the robustness of the infants seen in photographs, there is some question as to whether these infants actually required extra care or if they were simply used for profit. Particular to this exhibit was a Baby Incubator Cafe which is seen in some photos, although historians are unsure if this was an actual cafe or rather a place to view babies feeding. At the time there was little in the way of protest from either fair-goers or physicians. In fact there was already a seasonal incubator exhibit at Luna Park in West Seattle, the Infant Electrobator concession. The babies were mentioned by name in the newspaper during their stay at the exposition and their medical state followed throughout. A specific point of interest was the range in ethnicity of the infants. No deaths were experienced amongst the babies at the exhibit.


The year 2009 was the centennial of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition. The City and University held various activities to celebrate this anniversary.

A documentary was produced by 
 called "AYP-Seattle's Forgotten World's Fair" for 
.


On July 4, 2009, a group of 12 cyclists set off from 
, on a 1,000 mile bike ride to Seattle, Washington, to support the disease 
. The ride, titled 
, was a centennial of the 1909 adventure of Vic McDaniel and Ray Francisco who traveled on bicycles to the Exposition. The ride ended at the Drumheller Fountain, in the center of Frosh Pond on the campus of the University of Washington on July 16, 2009. Drumheller Fountain is one of the last known remnants from the 1909 fair.


				Pages for logged out editors 

			
The 
, 
 
 or 
, was a 
 held in 
 in 1909 publicizing the development of the 
. It was originally planned for 1907 to mark the 10th anniversary of the 
, but the organizers learned of the 
 being held that same year and rescheduled.

The fairgrounds became the campus of the 
.

Godfrey Chealander proposed the idea for the fair. Chealander was then Grand Secretary of the 
, was involved in the 
 exhibit at the 1905 
 in 
, 
. Originally, he pitched William Sheffield of the Alaska Club and James A. Wood, city editor of the 
 on the idea of a permanent exhibit in Seattle about Alaska. This merged with Wood's desire for an exposition to rival Portland. They soon gained the backing of 
 publisher 
—remarkably, for the time, without gaining the opposition of the rival 
.
 Among other early proponents of the exposition was John Edward Chilberg, one of a line of prominent Seattle merchants in the 
 family, who was president of the Alaska Club, and was then given the title of president of the Exposition.


 proposed that the exposition be held on the then largely forested campus of the 
, which in 1905 had exactly three buildings and little deliberate landscaping. At the time, this was considered rather far from the center of town, but Meany eventually sold the others involved on the idea that the forested campus could, itself, be an attraction for out-of-town visitors and that the 
 ride from downtown would not be an obstacle to attendance. Of course, he was also highly aware of what the landscaping and structures could do for the campus.


The 
 endorsed the fair, with the proviso that it would produce at least four permanent buildings, and that any state monetary contribution would be focused mainly on those buildings. 
 (the county in which Seattle is located) stepped up with US$300,000 for a 
 exhibit—the largest 
 ever built—and $78,000 for other exhibits. Because the original Klondike gold strikes had been in 
, the concept soon evolved to an "Alaska-Yukon Exposition"; later, at the behest of the 
, the "Pacific" theme was also added to emphasize the Oriental trade.
 The Exposition became known as the "A-Y-P" for short


Although the fair almost certainly could have been ready for 1907, it was postponed so as not to conflict with the 
. This turned out to be good fortune for Seattle, because 1907 proved to be a bad year for the economy. If the exposition had been held that year it almost certainly would have been a financial failure, rather than the success it was in 1909.


The 
 of Brookline, Massachusetts, were selected to plan the Exposition; the firm was already involved in planning parks and parkways for the City of Seattle. 
 visited Seattle in October 1906 and saw the dominant form of 
 toward the southeast. He selected the mountain as the focus of the primary axis of the Exposition. This axis later became the 
 of the University of Washington campus.

The principal landscape architect for the fair was the Olmsted firm's 
. His design centered on a long pool with a series of short waterfalls along Rainier Vista.
 
 firm, Howard and Galloway, based in San Francisco, was chosen as supervising architects for the Exposition buildings. They designed several buildings and supervised construction of those designed by other architects.

The fairgrounds were entirely ready for the June 1, 1909, opening.


The only foreign countries to erect entire buildings at the fair were 
 and Canada, but their presence was enough to validate the "Pacific" theme along with the US territory of 
 and the 
, recently ceded to the US by Spain. Other foreign countries were represented on a smaller scale. The very popular King County exhibit included a scale model of the 
 at nearby 
 and 
 of several Seattle scenes, the originals of which were only a trolley ride away. The Woman's Building emphasized the role of women in pioneering the 
 and in current charity work. The Pay Streak was Seattle's answer to Chicago's 
 and featured games of chance and amusements. There was also a reenactment of the 
 naval 
 (the Battle of 
 and 
).


The Forestry Building.

The Hoo-Hoo House and Bastion, which became the UW Faculty Lounge until torn down and replaced mid-century.

Display of 
 fruits.

Installing the statue of 
 that remains on the University of Washington campus

The 
 style 
 gate at the South entrance

The gates opened at 8:30 a.m. on June 1, and crowds entered immediately. At 9:30 a.m., attendees watched performances by military bands from the Army and the Navy.  Many sat in the fair's amphitheater, awaiting a signal scheduled to be given in Washington, D.C.  At 3 p.m. East Coast time (noon in Seattle), in the East Room of the White House, President Taft sent the signal.  He "opened...the Exposition...by touching a gold [telegraph] key, studded with gold nuggets taken from the first mine opened in the Klondike region."
 The telegraphic spark that Taft sent was received by telegraphers at the fairgrounds; as soon as it arrived, a gong was struck five times, a large American flag was unfurled, and there was a 21-gun salute, while other demonstrations of pageantry announced the official opening of the fair.


Opening Day, June 1, was declared a city holiday, and 80,000 people attended.
 Attendance was even higher—117,013—on "Seattle Day".
 Other big draws were days dedicated to various ethnic groups, fraternal organizations, and U.S. states.
 By the time the fair closed on October 16, more than 3,700,000 people had visited.

The fair had its own publicity department, and it used newspapers and magazines to promote the upcoming exhibition well in advance. In early 1908, Seattle newspapers reported that the publicity department was already showing positive results and the fair was earning many favorable mentions in publications all over the United States.
 The publicists stressed that this exhibition would be far better organized than 1907's 
, and would feature impressive entertainment. But what many newspapers found interesting was the assertion that this next World's Fair would not require any financial assistance or subsidies from the U.S. government; the only request made by the fair's directors was that the United States erect buildings and exhibits like any other country.


Throughout 1908, as each new exhibit was built and the fair gradually began to take shape, publicity about the fair's progress was sent out, and frequently printed, nearly verbatim, from the press releases. For example, the 
 in 
, 
, printed a story about how the fair would have motor boat races:  the article noted that the pavilion for the event was being built on "one of the prettiest spots on the exposition's shoreline." The article praised Puget Sound for being an area perfect for motor boating enthusiasts, and concluded by saying, "The climate is such that motor boating can be enjoyed all the year round."


By early 1909, the focus turned to who was going to attend, as many local newspapers in distant locations wrote articles about residents of their state who planned to make the trip out to Seattle. Also helpful was the fact that several major newspaper conventions were scheduled for the west coast, and the editors were said to be very interested in visiting the fair.
  The fair's organizers were also able to benefit from advertisements placed in newspapers by the railroads, which encouraged people to travel by rail to Seattle. One such ad, for the Great Northern Railway, promoted the train as the best way to enjoy a scenic trip: "an attractive route over the Rockies and through the Cascades" before finally arriving at what was sure to be "the World's Most Beautiful Fair."


The primary physical legacy of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition is the planning framework from the fair which continues to shape the University of Washington campus. The Rainier Vista and 
, the focus of the A-Y-P, are today the central focus of the Science Quadrangle of the university's overall plan.

Although most of the Exposition's buildings were designed as temporary structures, intended to last only for the duration of the fair, some were more permanent. The Fine Arts Palace was designed by Howard and Galloway as a chemistry building. It was used during the A-Y-P for the exhibit of art. After the Exposition was over, chemistry lab tables and other furnishings were moved in and it became the University's primary facility for teaching chemistry. The building was named Bagley Hall (after 
) and retained that name until 1937, when a new chemistry building named Bagley Hall opened. The older building then became the home of Architecture and Physiology. The building survives today, albeit with extensive renovation and restoration, and is known as Architecture Hall.

The A-Y-P Women's Building also survives. During the fair it housed exhibits related to women. Today the building is named Cunningham Hall (after 
), one of only a few buildings on the University of Washington campus named for women. During the Exposition itself the building was clad in stucco; today it is faced in wood siding. The building now houses various educational and other programs related to women.

Other buildings from the A-Y-P survived for a time, but were subsequently demolished as the university grew. The Forestry Building was demolished mid-century after the natural logs of the structure proved difficult to maintain and few alternative uses for the structure were found. It stood on the site of the current 
 (HUB). The original Meany Hall, the AYP Auditorium Hall, was damaged by an 
 and subsequently demolished. Another example is the Hoo-Hoo-House, designed by architect 
, a clubhouse with reception spaces constructed for the 
, a lumbermen's fraternity. After the fair, this building served as the faculty club until it was replaced in 1958–60 by the current faculty club.

Another legacy of the fair was the enhanced status of exposition president J. E. Chilberg. Although a respected banker, Chilberg had never really been one of the city's elite. He was drafted into his position with the fair simply as a man who was known to be good at getting things done, but without consideration by the city's elite that they had just made an outsider into something tantamount to royalty for the duration of a social season. Suddenly, any party at their 
 home became a major event in the social calendar. He and his wife found themselves dining with a close relative of the 
 and hosting a 
 ambassador.


The 
, originally erected for the fair, now stands in 
.

, founder of 
, stated that it was during the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition when he saw a manned flying machine for the first time and became fascinated with aircraft.

Because the Exposition buildings were built with non-union labor, various unions protested against the exposition in actions ranging from pamphleteering to boycotts. The Central Labor Council organized a protest march outside the grounds on 
. The 
 editorialized that the Exposition was, "a great fantastic monument to the brutal avarice of the capitalist class."


A month-old orphaned boy named Ernest was raffled away as a prize. Although a winning ticket was drawn, nobody claimed the prize. The ultimate destiny of the child was still being investigated in 2009.


Other human exhibits included displays presenting 
 people from the Philippines as dog-eating, primitive people; the "Alaskan Siberians — Eskimos"; and a Chinese village depicting 
 and recounting the recent 
.
 The Igorot exhibit spawned a letter of protest to the 
 signed by over 100 Filipino merchant marines, although some local resident Filipinos responded to the letter by defending the exhibit.


Premature babies were also displayed in French physician 
's 
, decades before such systems were commonplace in hospitals. This display was not unique to the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition; babies had been displayed in incubators since the 
 (and Seattle itself had seen at least two such exhibits before the A-Y-P Exposition
). Given the robustness of the infants seen in photographs, there is some question as to whether these infants actually required extra care or if they were simply used for profit. Particular to this exhibit was a Baby Incubator Cafe which is seen in some photos, although historians are unsure if this was an actual cafe or rather a place to view babies feeding. At the time there was little in the way of protest from either fair-goers or physicians. In fact there was already a seasonal incubator exhibit at Luna Park in West Seattle, the Infant Electrobator concession. The babies were mentioned by name in the newspaper during their stay at the exposition and their medical state followed throughout. A specific point of interest was the range in ethnicity of the infants. No deaths were experienced amongst the babies at the exhibit.


The year 2009 was the centennial of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition. The City and University held various activities to celebrate this anniversary.

A documentary was produced by 
 called "AYP-Seattle's Forgotten World's Fair" for 
.


On July 4, 2009, a group of 12 cyclists set off from 
, on a 1,000 mile bike ride to Seattle, Washington, to support the disease 
. The ride, titled 
, was a centennial of the 1909 adventure of Vic McDaniel and Ray Francisco who traveled on bicycles to the Exposition. The ride ended at the Drumheller Fountain, in the center of Frosh Pond on the campus of the University of Washington on July 16, 2009. Drumheller Fountain is one of the last known remnants from the 1909 fair.


				Pages for logged out editors 

			


 (
 
) is a 
 on the northwest extremity of North America. A 
 of the U.S., it borders 
 and the 
 in Canada to the east, and shares a western maritime border in the 
 with the Russian Federation's 
. To the north are the 
 and 
 Seas of the Arctic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean lies to the south and southwest.

Alaska is the 
 by area, comprising more total area than the next three largest states of 
, 
, and 
 combined, and is the 
. It is the 
 and 
 U.S. state, and the continent's most populous territory located mostly north of the 
, with a population of 736,081 as of 2020—more than quadruple the combined populations of 
 and Greenland.
  The state capital of 
 is the second-
, and the former capital of Alaska, 
, is the largest U.S. city by area.  Approximately half of Alaska's residents live within the 
. 

 have lived in Alaska for thousands of years, and it is widely believed that the region served as 
 of North America by way of the 
. The 
 was the first to actively 
 the area beginning in the 18th century, eventually establishing 
, which spanned most of the current state. The expense and logistical difficulty of maintaining this distant possession prompted 
 in 1867 for 
7.2 million (equivalent to $140 million in 2021). The area went through several administrative changes before becoming organized as a 
 on May 11, 1912. It was admitted as the 49th state of the U.S. on January 3, 1959.


Abundant natural resources have enabled Alaska—with one of the smallest state economies—to have one of the highest 
, with 
, and the extraction of 
 and oil, dominating 
. U.S. Armed Forces bases and 
 also contribute to the economy; more than half the state is federally-owned land containing 
, 
, and 
.

The Indigenous population of Alaska is proportionally the highest of any U.S. state, at over 15 percent.
 Various Indigenous languages are spoken, and Alaskan Natives are influential in local and state politics.

The name "Alaska" (Russian: 
, 
 
) was introduced in the 
 when it was used to refer to the 
. It was derived from an 
 
, 
, meaning "the mainland" or, more literally, "the object towards which the action of the sea is directed".
 It is also known as 
, the "great land", an 
 word that was derived from the same root.

Numerous indigenous peoples occupied Alaska for thousands of years before the arrival of European peoples to the area. Linguistic and DNA studies done here have provided evidence for the settlement of North America by way of the 
.
 At the 
 in the 
 in Alaska, remains of a six-week-old infant were found. The baby's DNA showed that she belonged to a population that was genetically separate from other native groups present elsewhere in the 
 at the end of the 
. Ben Potter, the 
 archaeologist who unearthed the remains at the Upward Sun River site in 2013, named this new group 
.


The 
 developed a society with a 
 kinship system of property inheritance and descent in what is today Southeast Alaska, along with parts of 
 and the 
. Also in Southeast were the 
, now well known for their unique arts. The 
 people came to Alaska from British Columbia in 1887, when President 
, and later the U.S. Congress, granted them permission to settle on 
 and found the town of 
. All three of these peoples, as well as other 
, experienced 
 outbreaks from the late 18th through the mid-19th century, with the most devastating 
 occurring in the 1830s and 1860s, resulting in high fatalities and social disruption.


The Aleutian Islands are still home to the 
's seafaring society, although they were the first Native Alaskans to be exploited by the Russians. Western and Southwestern Alaska are home to the 
, while their cousins the 
 live in what is now Southcentral Alaska. The 
 of the northern Interior region are 
 and primarily known today for their dependence on the caribou within the much-contested 
. The North Slope and 
 are occupied by the widespread 
.

Some researchers believe the first Russian settlement in Alaska was established in the 17th century.
 According to this hypothesis, in 1648 several 
 of 
's expedition came ashore in Alaska by storm and founded this settlement. This hypothesis is based on the testimony of 
 geographer Nikolai Daurkin, who had visited Alaska in 1764–1765 and who had reported on a village on the Kheuveren River, populated by "bearded men" who "pray to the 
". Some modern researchers associate Kheuveren with 
.


The first European vessel to reach Alaska is generally held to be the 
 under the authority of the surveyor 
 and assistant navigator 
 on August 21, 1732, during an expedition of Siberian Cossack A. F. Shestakov and Russian explorer 
 (1729–1735).
 Another European contact with Alaska occurred in 1741, when 
 led an 
 for the Russian Navy aboard the 
. After his crew returned to Russia with 
 pelts judged to be the finest fur in the world, small associations of 
 began to sail from the shores of Siberia toward the Aleutian Islands. The first permanent European settlement was founded in 1784.

Between 1774 and 1800, 
 sent several 
 to assert its claim over the Pacific Northwest. In 1789, a Spanish settlement and 
 were built in 
. These expeditions gave names to places such as 
, 
, and 
. Later, the 
 carried out an expanded colonization program during the early-to-mid-19th century. 
, renamed 
 from 1804 to 1867, on 
 in the 
 in what is now 
, became the capital of 
. It remained the capital after the colony was transferred to the United States. The Russians never fully colonized Alaska, and the colony was never very profitable. Evidence of Russian settlement in names and churches survive throughout southeastern Alaska.

, the 24th 
, negotiated the 
 (also known as Seward's Folly) with the Russians in 1867 for $7.2 million. Russia's contemporary ruler 
 
, the 
, 
 and 
, also planned the sale;
 the purchase was made on March 30, 1867. Six months later the commissioners arrived in Sitka and the formal transfer was arranged; the formal flag-raising took place at Fort Sitka on October 18, 1867. In the ceremony 250 uniformed U.S. soldiers marched to the governor's house at "Castle Hill", where the Russian troops lowered the Russian flag and the U.S. flag was raised. This event is celebrated as 
, a legal holiday on October 18.

Alaska was loosely governed by the military initially, and was administered as a 
 starting in 1884, with a governor appointed by the United States president. A federal 
 was headquartered in Sitka. For most of Alaska's first decade under the United States flag, Sitka was the only community inhabited by American settlers. They organized a "provisional city government", which was Alaska's first municipal government, but not in a legal sense.
 Legislation allowing Alaskan communities to legally 
 did not come about until 1900, and 
 for cities was extremely limited or unavailable until statehood took effect in 1959.

Starting in the 1890s and stretching in some places to the early 1910s, gold rushes in Alaska and the nearby 
 brought thousands of miners and settlers to Alaska. Alaska was officially incorporated as an organized territory in 1912. Alaska's capital, which had been in 
 until 1906, was moved north to 
. Construction of the 
 began that same year. European immigrants from Norway and Sweden also settled in southeast Alaska, where they entered the fishing and logging industries.

During 
, the 
 focused on 
, 
 and 
, all of which were occupied by the 
.
 During the Japanese occupation, a white American civilian and two 
 personnel were killed at Attu and Kiska respectively, and nearly a total of 50 Aleut civilians and eight sailors were interned in Japan. About half of the Aleuts died during the period of internment.
 
/
 and 
 became significant bases for the 
, 
 and 
. The United States 
 program involved flying American warplanes through Canada to Fairbanks and then Nome; Soviet pilots took possession of these aircraft, ferrying them to fight the German invasion of the 
. The construction of military bases contributed to the population growth of some Alaskan cities.

Statehood for Alaska was an important cause of 
 early in his tenure as a congressional delegate. Decades later, the statehood movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1946. The Alaska Statehood Committee and Alaska's Constitutional Convention would soon follow. Statehood supporters also found themselves fighting major battles against political foes, mostly in the U.S. Congress but also within Alaska. Statehood was approved by the U.S. Congress on July 7, 1958; Alaska was officially proclaimed a state on January 3, 1959.

On March 27, 1964, the massive 
 killed 133 people and destroyed several villages and portions of large coastal communities, mainly by the resultant 
 and landslides. It was the 
 in recorded history, with a 
 of 9.2 (more than a thousand times as powerful as the 
).
 The time of day (5:36 pm), time of year (spring) and location of the 
 were all cited as factors in potentially sparing thousands of lives, particularly in Anchorage.

Lasting four minutes and thirty-eight seconds, the magnitude 9.2 
 remains the most powerful earthquake recorded in 
 history, and the second 
 in world history. Six hundred miles (970 km) of fault ruptured at once and moved up to 60 ft (18 m), releasing about 500 years of stress buildup. 
, fissures, landslides, and other ground failures caused major structural damage in several communities and much damage to property. 
 sustained great destruction or damage to many inadequately 
 houses, buildings, and infrastructure (paved streets, sidewalks, water and sewer mains, electrical systems, and other man-made equipment), particularly in the several landslide zones along 
. Two hundred miles (320 km) southwest, some areas near 
 were permanently raised by 30 feet (9 m). Southeast of Anchorage, areas around the head of 
 near 
 and 
 dropped as much as 8 feet (2.4 m), requiring reconstruction and fill to raise the 
 above the new high 
 mark.

In 
, 
 suffered a massive underwater landslide, resulting in the deaths of 32 people between the collapse of the 
 city harbor and docks, and inside the ship that was docked there at the time. Nearby, a 27-foot (8.2 m) tsunami destroyed the village of 
, killing 23 of the 68 people who lived there; survivors out-ran the wave, climbing to high ground. Post-quake tsunamis severely affected 
, 
, 
, and other Alaskan communities, as well as people and property in 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 Tsunamis also caused damage in 
 and 
. Evidence of motion directly related to the earthquake was also reported from 
 and 
.

The 1968 discovery of oil at 
 and the 1977 completion of the 
 led to an oil boom. Royalty revenues from oil have funded large state budgets from 1980 onward.

Oil production was not the only economic value of Alaska's land, however. In the second half of the 20th century, Alaska discovered 
 as an important source of revenue. Tourism became popular after World War II, when military personnel stationed in the region returned home praising its natural splendor. The 
, built during the war, and the 
, completed in 1963, made the state more accessible than before. Tourism became increasingly important in Alaska, and today over 1.4 million people visit the state each year.


With tourism more vital to the economy, 
 also rose in importance. The 
 (ANILCA) of 1980 added 53.7 million acres (217,000 km²) to the 
, parts of 25 rivers to the 
, 3.3 million acres (13,000 km²) to 
, and 43.6 million acres (176,000 km²) to 
. Because of the Act, Alaska now contains two-thirds of all American national parklands. Today, more than half of Alaskan land is owned by the 
.


In 1989, the 
 hit a reef in the 
, 
 more than 11 million U.S. gallons (42 
) of crude oil over 1,100 miles (1,800 km) of coastline. Today, the battle between philosophies of development and conservation is seen in the contentious debate over oil drilling in the 
 and the proposed 
.

The 
 was confirmed to have reached the U.S. state of Alaska on March 12, 2020.


On March 11, 
 
's office declared a state of emergency to ensure all entities have the necessary response resources.
 The next day, the first case, a foreign national in 
, was announced to the public.


On March 21, 2020, 
, a small, coastal town of approximately 8,000 residents located in 
 was determined to have a cluster of six COVID-19 cases. The town 
 for the following 14 days.
 On March 24, 2020, three more cases of COVID-19 were found in Ketchikan, bringing the total there to nine.
 The next day, the total cases there reached 11.
 On April 1, 2020, the number of positive cases of COVID-19 in Ketchikan rose to 14.


Located at the northwest corner of 
, Alaska is the northernmost and westernmost state in the United States, but also has the most easterly longitude in the United States because the 
 extend into the 
.
 Alaska is the only non-
 U.S. state on continental North America; about 500 miles (800 km) of 
 (Canada) separates Alaska from 
. It is technically part of the 
, but is sometimes not included in colloquial use; Alaska is not part of the 
, often called 
. The capital city, 
, is situated on the mainland of the North American continent but is not connected by road to the rest of the North American highway system.

The state is bordered by Canada's 
 and 
 to the east (making it the only state to only border a 
); the 
 and the Pacific Ocean to the south and southwest; the 
, 
, and 
 to the west; and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaska's territorial waters touch Russia's territorial waters in the Bering Strait, as the Russian 
 and Alaskan 
 are only 3 miles (4.8 km) apart. Alaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined.


At 663,268 square miles (1,717,856 km
) in total area, Alaska is by far the largest state in the United States. Alaska is more than twice the size of the second-largest U.S. state (Texas), and it is larger than the next three largest states (Texas, California, and Montana) combined. Alaska is the seventh 
. If it was an independent nation would be the 16th largest country in the world, larger than 
.

With its myriad islands, Alaska has nearly 34,000 miles (55,000 km) of tidal shoreline. The Aleutian Islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the 
. Many active 
 are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions. 
, for example, is home to 
, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to 10,000 feet (3,000 m) above the North Pacific. The chain of volcanoes extends to 
, west of Anchorage on the mainland. Geologists have identified Alaska as part of 
, a large region consisting of multiple states and Canadian provinces in the 
, which is actively undergoing 
.

One of the world's largest tides occurs in 
, just south of Anchorage, where tidal differences can be more than 35 feet (10.7 m).


Alaska has more than three million lakes.
 
 and wetland 
 cover 188,320 square miles (487,700 km
) (mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands). Glacier ice covers about 28,957 square miles (75,000 km
) of Alaska.
 The 
 is the largest glacier in North America, covering 2,008 square miles (5,200 km
) alone.


There are no officially defined borders demarcating the various regions of Alaska, but there are six widely accepted regions:

The most populous region of Alaska, containing 
, the 
 and the 
. Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south of the 
 and west of the 
 also fall within the definition of South Central, as do the 
 area and the communities of 
 and 
.


Also referred to as the Panhandle or 
, this is the region of Alaska closest to the contiguous states. As such, this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the 
. The region is dominated by the 
 as well as the 
, the largest national forest in the United States. It contains the state capital 
, the former capital 
, and 
, at one time Alaska's largest city.
 The 
 provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area and country, as only three communities (
, 
 and 
) enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system.


The Interior is the largest region of Alaska; much of it is uninhabited wilderness. 
 is the only large city in the region. 
 is located here. 
, formerly Mount McKinley, is the highest mountain in North America, and is also located here.

Southwest Alaska is a sparsely inhabited region stretching some 500 miles (800 km) inland from the Bering Sea. Most of the population lives along the coast. 
 is also located in Southwest. The massive 
, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here. Portions of the 
 are considered part of Southwest, with the remaining portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below).

The North Slope is mostly 
 peppered with small villages. The area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil and contains both the 
 and the 
.
 The city of 
, formerly known as Barrow, is the northernmost city in the United States and is located here. The 
, anchored by 
 and also containing the 
 valley, is often regarded as being part of this region. However, the respective 
 of the North Slope and of the Northwest Arctic seldom consider themselves to be one people.


More than 300 small volcanic islands make up this chain, which stretches more than 1,200 miles (1,900 km) into the Pacific Ocean. Some of these islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, but the 
 was drawn west of 
 to keep the whole state, and thus the entire North American continent, within the same legal day. Two of the islands, 
 and 
, were occupied by Japanese forces during World War II.

According to an October 1998 report by the 
, approximately 65% of Alaska is owned and managed by the 
 as public lands, including a multitude of 
, national parks, and 
.
 Of these, the 
 manages 87 million acres (35 million hectares), or 23.8% of the state. The 
 is managed by the 
. It is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising 16 million acres (6.5 million hectares).

Of the remaining land area, the state of Alaska owns 101 million acres (41 million hectares), its entitlement under the 
. A portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to the organized boroughs presented above, under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs. Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities. These are not very popular due to the often remote and roadless locations. The 
, as a 
, also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently.

Another 44 million acres (18 million hectares) are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under the 
 (ANCSA) of 1971. 
 
 often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other communications. Provisions of ANCSA allowing the corporations' land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1991 were repealed before they could take effect. Effectively, the corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual Alaskans) but cannot sell the land. 
 can be and are sold on the open market, however.

Various private interests own the remaining land, totaling about one percent of the state. Alaska is, by a large margin, the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when Native corporation holdings are excluded.

The Alaska Heritage Resources Survey (AHRS) is a restricted 
 of all reported 
 and 
 sites within the U.S. state of Alaska; it is maintained by the Office of History and Archaeology. The survey's inventory of cultural resources includes objects, structures, buildings, sites, districts, and travel ways, with a general provision that they are more than fifty years old. As of 31 January 2012
, more than 35,000 sites have been reported.


Alaska is not divided into 
, as most of the other U.S. states, but it is divided into 
.
 Delegates to the 
 wanted to avoid the pitfalls of the traditional county system and adopted their own unique model.
 Many of the more densely populated parts of the state are part of Alaska's 16 boroughs, which function somewhat similarly to counties in other states. However, unlike county-equivalents in the other 49 states, the boroughs do not cover the entire land area of the state. The area not part of any borough is referred to as the 
.

The Unorganized Borough has no government of its own, but the 
 in cooperation with the state divided the Unorganized Borough into 11 
 solely for the purposes of statistical analysis and presentation. A 
 is a mechanism for management of the 
 in Alaska. The state is divided into 34 recording districts which are centrally administered under a state 
. All recording districts use the same acceptance criteria, fee schedule, etc., for accepting documents into the public record.

Whereas many U.S. states use a three-tiered system of decentralization—state/county/township—most of Alaska uses only two tiers—state/borough. Owing to the low population density, most of the land is located in the 
. As the name implies, it has no intermediate borough government but is administered directly by the state government. In 2000, 57.71% of Alaska's area has this status, with 13.05% of the population.


Anchorage merged the city government with the Greater Anchorage Area Borough in 1975 to form the Municipality of Anchorage, containing the city proper and the communities of Eagle River, Chugiak, Peters Creek, Girdwood, Bird, and Indian. Fairbanks has a separate borough (the 
) and municipality (the City of Fairbanks).

The state's most populous city is 
, home to 291,247 people in 2020.
 The richest 
 is 
 ($42,245). 
, Sitka, Juneau, and Anchorage are the four 
.

As reflected in the 
, Alaska has a total of 355 incorporated cities and 
 (CDPs).
 The tally of cities includes four unified municipalities, essentially the equivalent of a 
. The majority of these communities are located in the rural expanse of Alaska known as "
" and are unconnected to that contiguous North American road network. The table at the bottom of this section lists about the 100 largest cities and census-designated places in Alaska, in population order.

Of Alaska's 2020 U.S. census population figure of 733,391, 16,655 people, or 2.27% of the population, did not live in an incorporated city or census-designated place.
 Approximately three-quarters of that figure were people who live in urban and suburban neighborhoods on the outskirts of the city limits of Ketchikan, Kodiak, Palmer and Wasilla. CDPs have not been established for these areas by the United States Census Bureau, except that seven CDPs were established for the Ketchikan-area neighborhoods in the 
 (Clover Pass, Herring Cove, Ketchikan East, Mountain Point, North 
, 
 and 
 East), but have not been used since. The remaining population was scattered throughout Alaska, both within organized boroughs and in the Unorganized Borough, in largely remote areas.


The climate in south and southeastern Alaska is a mid-latitude 
 (
: 
), and a subarctic oceanic climate (Köppen 
) in the northern parts. On an annual basis, the southeast is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year. Juneau averages over 50 in (130 cm) of precipitation a year, and 
 averages over 150 in (380 cm).
 This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.
The climate of 
 and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast. While the area gets less rain than southeast Alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer. On average, 
 receives 16 in (41 cm) of precipitation a year, with around 75 in (190 cm) of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow. It is a subarctic climate (
) due to its brief, cool summers.

The climate of 
 is determined in large part by the 
 and the 
. It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north. The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is. This region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation. An area stretching from the northern side of the Seward Peninsula to the 
 valley (i.e., the region around 
) is technically a 
, with portions receiving less than 10 in (25 cm) of precipitation annually. On the other extreme, some locations between 
 and 
 average around 100 in (250 cm) of precipitation.


The climate of the interior of Alaska is subarctic. Some of the highest and lowest temperatures in Alaska occur around the area near 
. The summers may have temperatures reaching into the 90s °F (the low-to-mid 30s °C), while in the winter, the temperature can fall below −60 °F (−51 °C). Precipitation is sparse in the Interior, often less than 10 in (25 cm) a year, but what precipitation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter.

The highest and lowest recorded temperatures in Alaska are both in the Interior. The highest is 100 °F (38 °C) in 
 (which is just 8 mi or 13 km inside the arctic circle) on June 27, 1915,
 making Alaska tied with Hawaii as the state with the lowest high temperature in the United States.
 The lowest official Alaska temperature is −80 °F (−62 °C) in 
 on January 23, 1971,
 one degree above the lowest temperature recorded in continental North America (in 
).


The climate in the extreme north of Alaska is 
 (
) with long, very cold winters and short, cool summers. Even in July, the average low temperature in 
 is 34 °F (1 °C).
 Precipitation is light in this part of Alaska, with many places averaging less than 10 in (25 cm) per year, mostly as snow which stays on the ground almost the entire year.

The 
 found in the 
 that the population of Alaska was 736,081 on April 1, 2020, a 3.6% increase since the 
.
 According to the 2010 United States census, the U.S. state of Alaska had a population of 710,231, increasing from 626,932 at the 2000 U.S. census.

In 2010, Alaska ranked as the 47th state by population, ahead of 
, 
, and 
 (and Washington, D.C.). Estimates show North Dakota ahead as of 2018
.
 Alaska is the least densely populated state, and one of the most sparsely populated areas in the world, at 1.2 inhabitants per square mile (0.46/km
), with the next state, Wyoming, at 5.8 inhabitants per square mile (2.2/km
).
 Alaska is by far the largest U.S. state by 
, and the tenth wealthiest (per capita income).
 As of 2018
 due to its population size, it is one of 14 U.S. states that still have only one telephone 
.


The 2019 
 estimated 60.2% of the population was 
, 3.7% 
, 15.6% 
, 6.5% 
, 1.4% 
, 7.5% two or more races, and 7.3% 
 of any race. At the survey estimates, 7.8% of the total population was foreign-born from 2015 to 2019.
 In 2015, 61.3% was non-Hispanic white, 3.4% black or African American, 13.3% American Indian or Alaska Native, 6.2% Asian, 0.9% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 0.3% some other race, and 7.7% multiracial. Hispanics and Latin Americans were 7% of the state population in 2015.
 From 2015 to 2019, the largest Hispanic and Latin American groups were 
, 
, and 
. The largest Asian groups living in the state were 
, 
, and 
 and 
.


The state was 66.7% white (64.1% non-Hispanic white), 14.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 5.4% Asian, 3.3% black or African American, 1.0% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 1.6% from some other race, and 7.3% from two or more races in 2010. Hispanics or Latin Americans of any race made up 5.5% of the population in 2010.
 As of 2011
, 50.7% of Alaska's population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups (i.e., did not have two parents of non-Hispanic white ancestry).
 In 1960, the United States Census Bureau reported Alaska's population as 77.2% white, 3% black, and 18.8% American Indian and Alaska Native.


According to the 2011 American Community Survey, 83.4% of people over the age of five spoke only English at home. About 3.5% spoke Spanish at home, 2.2% spoke another 
, about 4.3% spoke an 
 language (including 
),
 and about 5.3% spoke other languages at home.
 In 2019, the American Community Survey determined 83.7% spoke only English, and 16.3% spoke another language other than English. The most spoken European language after English was Spanish, spoken by approximately 4.0% of the state population. Collectively, Asian and Pacific Islander languages were spoken by 5.6% of Alaskans.
 Since 2010, a total of 5.2% of Alaskans speak one of the state's 20 
,
 known locally as "native languages".

The 
 at the 
 claims that at least 20 
 exist and there are also some languages with different dialects.
 Most of Alaska's native languages belong to either the 
 or 
 language families; however, some languages are thought to be 
 (e.g. 
) or have not yet been classified (e.g. 
).
 As of 2014
 nearly all of Alaska's native languages were classified as either threatened, shifting, moribund, nearly extinct, or dormant languages.


In October 2014, the governor of Alaska signed a bill declaring the state's 20 indigenous languages to have official status.
 This bill gave them symbolic recognition as official languages, though they have not been adopted for official use within the government. The 20 languages that were included in the bill are:

According to statistics collected by the 
 from 2010, about 34% of Alaska residents were members of religious congregations. Of the religious population, 100,960 people identified as 
; 50,866 as Roman Catholic; and 32,550 as mainline Protestants.
 Roughly 4% were Mormon, 0.5% 
, 0.5% Muslim, 1% Buddhist, 0.2% Baháʼí, and 0.5% Hindu.
 The largest religious denominations in Alaska as of 2010
 was the 
 with 50,866 adherents; non-denominational Evangelicals with 38,070 adherents; 
 with 32,170 adherents; and the 
 with 19,891 adherents.
 Alaska has been identified, along with Washington and Oregon in the Pacific Northwest, as being 
, in terms of church membership.


The Pew Research Center in 2014 determined 62% of the adult population practiced Christianity. Protestantism was the largest Christian tradition, dominated by Evangelicalism. Mainline Protestants were the second largest Protestant Christian group, followed by 
. The Roman Catholic Church remained the largest single Christian tradition practiced in Alaska. Of the unaffiliated population, they made up the largest non-Christian religious affiliation. 
 made up 5% of the population and the largest non-Christian religion was 
. In 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 57% of adults were Christian.


In 1795, the first 
 was established in 
. Intermarriage with Alaskan Natives helped the Russian immigrants integrate into society. As a result, an increasing number of Russian Orthodox churches gradually became established within Alaska.
 Alaska also has the largest 
 population (by percentage) of any state.
 In 2009, there were 6,000 Jews in Alaska (for whom observance of 
 
).
 Alaskan Hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other Asian religious communities, including 
 and 
.
 In 2010, Alaskan Hindus established the 
, making it the first Hindu Temple in Alaska and the northernmost Hindu Temple in the world. There are an estimated 2,000–3,000 Hindus in Alaska. The vast majority of Hindus live in Anchorage or Fairbanks.

Estimates for the number of Muslims in Alaska range from 2,000 to 5,000.
 The 
 began efforts in the late 1990s to construct a mosque in Anchorage. They broke ground on a building in south Anchorage in 2010 and were nearing completion in late 2014. When completed, the mosque will be the first in the state and one of the northernmost mosques in the world.
 There's also a 
 center.
 

As of October 2022, Alaska had a total employment of 316,900. The number of employer establishments was 21,077.


The 2018 
 was $55 billion, 48th in the U.S. Its 
 for 2018 was $73,000, ranking 7th in the nation. According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Alaska had the fifth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.75 percent.
 The oil and gas industry dominates the Alaskan economy, with more than 80% of the state's revenues derived from petroleum extraction. Alaska's main export product (excluding oil and natural gas) is seafood, primarily salmon, cod, pollock and crab.

Agriculture represents a very small fraction of the Alaskan economy. Agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock, dairy products, vegetables, and livestock. Manufacturing is limited, with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere.

Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation. Military bases are a significant component of the economy in the Fairbanks North Star, Anchorage and Kodiak Island boroughs, as well as Kodiak. Federal subsidies are also an important part of the economy, allowing the state to keep taxes low. Its industrial outputs are crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, 
, 
, 
 and other mining, seafood processing, timber and wood products. There is also a growing service and tourism sector. Tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging.

Alaska has vast energy resources, although its oil reserves have been largely depleted. Major oil and gas reserves were found in the 
 (ANS) and Cook Inlet basins, but according to the 
, by February 2014 Alaska had fallen to fourth place in the nation in crude oil production after Texas, North Dakota, and California.
 Prudhoe Bay on Alaska's North Slope is still the second highest-yielding oil field in the United States, typically producing about 400,000 barrels per day (64,000 m
/d), although by early 2014 North Dakota's 
 was producing over 900,000 barrels per day (140,000 m
/d).
 Prudhoe Bay was the largest 
 field ever discovered in North America, but was much smaller than Canada's enormous 
 field, which by 2014 was producing about 1,500,000 barrels per day (240,000 m
/d) of 
, and had hundreds of years of producible reserves at that rate.


The 
 can transport and pump up to 2.1 million barrels (330,000 m
) of crude oil per day, more than any other crude oil pipeline in the United States. Additionally, substantial coal deposits are found in Alaska's bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite coal basins. The 
 estimates that there are 85.4 trillion cubic feet (2,420 km
) of undiscovered, technically recoverable gas from natural gas hydrates on the Alaskan North Slope.
 Alaska also offers some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers. Large swaths of the Alaskan coastline offer wind and geothermal energy potential as well.


Alaska's economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating, transportation, electric power and light. Although wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped, proposals for statewide energy systems (e.g. with special 
) were judged uneconomical (at the time of the report, 2001) due to low (less than 50¢/gal) fuel prices, long distances and low population.
 The cost of a gallon of gas in urban Alaska today is usually thirty to sixty cents higher than the national average; prices in rural areas are generally significantly higher but vary widely depending on transportation costs, seasonal usage peaks, nearby petroleum development infrastructure and many other factors.

The 
 is a constitutionally authorized appropriation of oil revenues, established by voters in 1976 to manage a surplus in state petroleum revenues from oil, largely in anticipation of the then recently constructed 
. The fund was originally proposed by Governor 
 on the eve of the 1969 Prudhoe Bay lease sale, out of fear that the legislature would spend the entire proceeds of the sale (which amounted to $900 million) at once. It was later championed by Governor 
 and 
 
 Hugh Malone. It has served as an attractive political prospect ever since, diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund.

The 
 was written so as to discourage dedicating state funds for a particular purpose. The Permanent Fund has become the rare exception to this, mostly due to the political climate of distrust existing during the time of its creation. From its initial principal of $734,000, the fund has grown to $50 billion as a result of oil royalties and capital investment programs.
 Most if not all the principal is invested conservatively outside Alaska. This has led to frequent calls by Alaskan politicians for the Fund to make investments within Alaska, though such a stance has never gained momentum.

Starting in 1982, dividends from the fund's annual growth have been paid out each year to eligible Alaskans, ranging from an initial $1,000 in 1982 (equal to three years' payout, as the distribution of payments was held up in a lawsuit over the distribution scheme) to $3,269 in 2008 (which included a one-time $1,200 "Resource Rebate"). Every year, the state legislature takes out 8% from the earnings, puts 3% back into the principal for inflation proofing, and the remaining 5% is distributed to all qualifying Alaskans. To qualify for the Permanent Fund Dividend, one must have lived in the state for a minimum of 12 months, maintain constant residency subject to allowable absences,
 and not be subject to court judgments or criminal convictions which fall under various disqualifying classifications or may subject the payment amount to civil garnishment.

The Permanent Fund is often considered to be one of the leading examples of a 
 policy in the world.


The cost of goods in Alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 48 states. Federal government employees, particularly 
 (USPS) workers and active-duty military members, receive a Cost of Living Allowance usually set at 25% of base pay because, while the cost of living has gone down, it is still one of the highest in the country.


Rural Alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods compared to the rest of the country, due to the relatively limited transportation infrastructure.


Due to the northern climate and short growing season, relatively little farming occurs in Alaska. Most farms are in either the 
, about 40 miles (64 km) northeast of 
, or on the 
, about 60 miles (97 km) southwest of Anchorage. The short 100-day growing season limits the crops that can be grown, but the long sunny summer days make for productive growing seasons. The primary crops are potatoes, carrots, lettuce, and cabbage.

The 
 is another notable agricultural locus, especially the 
 area, about 100 miles (160 km) southeast of Fairbanks, with a sizable concentration of farms growing agronomic crops; these farms mostly lie north and east of 
. This area was largely set aside and developed under a state program spearheaded by Hammond during his second term as governor. Delta-area crops consist predominantly of barley and hay. West of Fairbanks lies another concentration of small farms catering to restaurants, the hotel and tourist industry, and 
.

Alaskan agriculture has experienced a surge in growth of 
, small farms and 
 in recent years, with the highest percentage increase (46%) in the nation in growth in farmers' markets in 2011, compared to 17% nationwide.
 The 
 industry has also taken off, as the growing season allows farmers to harvest during a gap in supply elsewhere in the world, thereby filling a niche in the flower market.


Alaska, with no counties, lacks county fairs. However, a small assortment of state and local fairs (with the 
 in 
 the largest), are held mostly in the late summer. The fairs are mostly located in communities with historic or current agricultural activity, and feature local farmers exhibiting produce in addition to more high-profile commercial activities such as carnival rides, concerts and food. "Alaska Grown" is used as an agricultural slogan.

Alaska has an abundance of seafood, with the primary fisheries in the Bering Sea and the North Pacific. Seafood is one of the few food items that is often cheaper within the state than outside it. Many Alaskans take advantage of salmon seasons to harvest portions of their household diet while fishing for subsistence, as well as sport. This includes fish taken by hook, net or 
.


Hunting for subsistence, primarily 
, 
, and 
 is still common in the state, particularly in remote 
 communities. An example of a traditional native food is 
, the Eskimo ice cream, which can consist of reindeer fat, seal oil, dried fish meat and local berries.

Alaska's reindeer herding is concentrated on 
, where wild caribou can be prevented from mingling and migrating with the domesticated reindeer.


Most food in Alaska is transported into the state from 
 (the other 49 US states), and shipping costs make food in the cities relatively expensive. In rural areas, subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive. Although most small towns and villages in Alaska lie along the coastline, the cost of importing food to remote villages can be high, because of the terrain and difficult road conditions, which change dramatically, due to varying climate and precipitation changes. The cost of transport can reach as high as 50¢ per pound ($1.10/kg) or more in some remote areas, during the most difficult times, if these locations can be reached at all during such inclement weather and terrain conditions. The cost of delivering a 1 US gallon (3.8 L) of milk is about $3.50 in many villages where per capita income can be $20,000 or less. Fuel cost per gallon is routinely twenty to thirty cents higher than the contiguous United States average, with only Hawaii having higher prices.


Some of Alaska's popular annual events are the 
 from Anchorage to Nome, World Ice Art Championships in Fairbanks, the Blueberry Festival and Alaska Hummingbird Festival in 
, the Sitka Whale Fest, and the Stikine River Garnet Fest in 
. The 
 attracts the largest springtime concentration of 
 in the world.

The 
 celebrates the rich heritage of Alaska's 11 cultural groups. Their purpose is to encourage cross-cultural exchanges among all people and enhance self-esteem among Native people. The 
 promotes and markets Native art from all regions and cultures in the State, using the internet.


Influences on music in Alaska include the traditional music of Alaska Natives as well as folk music brought by later immigrants from Russia and Europe. Prominent musicians from Alaska include singer 
, traditional Aleut flautist 
, folk singer-songwriter 
, Christian music singer-songwriter 
, metal/post hardcore band 
 and the groups 
 and 
.

There are many established music festivals in Alaska, including the 
, the Fairbanks Summer Arts Festival the Anchorage Folk Festival, the 
, the Sitka Jazz Festival, and the 
. The most prominent orchestra in Alaska is the 
, though the Fairbanks Symphony Orchestra and 
 are also notable. The 
 is currently the state's only professional opera company, though there are several volunteer and semi-professional organizations in the state as well.

The official 
 of Alaska is "
", which was adopted in 1955; it celebrates the 
.

Alaska's first independent picture entirely made in Alaska was 
, produced by Alaskan businessman 
 and filmed in and around Anchorage. Released in 1924 by the Alaska Moving Picture Corporation, it was the only film the company made.

One of the most prominent movies filmed in Alaska is 
's 
, starring Alaska Native 
. In 1932, an expedition set out from 
's studios in Hollywood to Alaska to film what was then billed as "The Biggest Picture Ever Made". Upon arriving in Alaska, they set up "Camp Hollywood" in Northwest Alaska, where they lived during the duration of the filming. 
 spared no expense in spite of the remote location, going so far as to hire the chef from the 
 in Hollywood to prepare meals.


When 
 premiered at the 
 in New York City, the studio received the largest amount of feedback in its history. 
 was critically acclaimed and released worldwide; as a result, Mala became an international movie star. 
 won the first Oscar for 
 at the Academy Awards, and showcased and preserved aspects of 
 culture on film.

The 1983 Disney movie 
 was at least partially shot in Alaska. The 1991 film 
, based on 
's 1906 novel and starring 
, was filmed in and around 
. 
's 1994 
, starring 
, was filmed in part at the 
 near 
.
 The 1999 
 film 
, starring 
, 
, and 
, was filmed in Juneau.

The psychological thriller 
, starring 
 and 
, was shot in Canada, but was set in Alaska. The 2007 film directed by Sean Penn, 
, was partially filmed and set in Alaska. The film, which is based on the novel of the same name, follows the adventures of 
, who died in a remote abandoned bus along the 
 west of 
 in 1992.

Many films and television shows set in Alaska are not filmed there; for example, 
, set in the fictional town of Cicely, Alaska, was filmed in 
. The 2007 horror feature 
 is set in 
, but was filmed in New Zealand.

Many reality television shows are filmed in Alaska. In 2011, the 
 found ten set in the state.


The 2020 videogame 
 takes place around Southern Alaska and includes representation of 
 culture.

The 
 are Alaska's statewide police force. They have a long and storied history, but were not an official organization until 1941. Before the force was officially organized, law enforcement in Alaska was handled by various federal agencies. Larger towns usually have their own local police and some villages rely on "Public Safety Officers" who have police training but do not carry firearms. In much of the state, the troopers serve as the only police force available. In addition to enforcing traffic and criminal law, wildlife Troopers enforce hunting and fishing regulations. Due to the varied terrain and wide scope of the Troopers' duties, they employ a wide variety of land, air, and water patrol vehicles.

Many rural communities in Alaska are considered "dry", having outlawed the importation of alcoholic beverages.
 Suicide rates for rural residents are higher than urban.


 and other violent crimes are also at high levels in the state; this is in part linked to alcohol abuse.
 Alaska has the highest rate of sexual assault in the nation, especially in rural areas. The average age of sexually assaulted victims is 16 years old. In four out of five cases, the suspects were relatives, friends or acquaintances.


As of 2022
 and 
 account for 47% and 46% of private health insurance, respectively.
 Premera and 
 offer insurance on the federally-run Affordable Care Exchange.


The 
 administers many 
 in Alaska. In addition, the state operates a boarding school, 
 in 
, and provides partial funding for other boarding schools, including 
 in 
 and The Galena Interior Learning Academy in 
.


There are more than a dozen 
. Accredited universities in Alaska include the 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 Alaska is the only state that has no collegiate athletic programs that are members of 
, although both Alaska-Fairbanks and Alaska-Anchorage maintain single sport membership in Division I for 
.

The Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development operates AVTEC, Alaska's Institute of Technology.
 Campuses in Seward and Anchorage offer one-week to 11-month training programs in areas as diverse as Information Technology, Welding, Nursing, and Mechanics.

Alaska has had a problem with a "
". Many of its young people, including most of the highest academic achievers, leave the state after high school graduation and do not return. As of 2013
, Alaska did not have a 
 or medical school.
 The 
 has attempted to combat this by offering partial four-year scholarships to the top 10% of Alaska high school graduates, via the Alaska Scholars Program.


Beginning in 1998, schools in rural Alaska must have at least 10 students to retain funding from the state, and campuses not meeting the number close. This was due to the loss in oil revenues that previously propped up smaller rural schools.
 In 2015, there was a proposal to raise that minimum to 25,
 but legislators in the state largely did not agree.


Alaska has few road connections compared to the rest of the U.S. The state's road system, covering a relatively small area of the state, linking the central population centers and the 
, the principal route out of the state through Canada. The state capital, Juneau, is not accessible by road, only a car ferry; this has spurred debate over decades about moving the capital to a city on the road system, or building a road connection from 
. The western part of Alaska has no road system connecting the communities with the rest of Alaska.

The 
 consists of a total of 1,082 miles (1,741 km). One unique feature of the Alaska Highway system is the 
, an active 
 tunnel recently upgraded to provide a paved roadway link with the isolated community of 
 on 
 to the 
 about 50 miles (80 km) southeast of Anchorage at 
. At 2.5 miles (4.0 km), the tunnel was the longest road tunnel in North America until 2007.
 The tunnel is the longest combination 
 in North America.

The 
, near its intersection with the 


The 
 bridge on the 
 is 1,036 feet (316 m) long.



Alaska welcome sign on the 


Built around 1915, the 
 (ARR) played a key role in the development of Alaska through the 20th century. It links north Pacific shipping through providing critical infrastructure with tracks that run from 
 to 
 by way of 
, passing through Anchorage, 
, Wasilla, 
, 
, and Fairbanks, with spurs to 
, 
 and 
. The cities, towns, villages, and region served by ARR tracks are known statewide as "The Railbelt". In recent years, the ever-improving paved highway system began to eclipse the railroad's importance in Alaska's economy.

The railroad played a vital role in Alaska's development, moving freight into Alaska while transporting natural resources southward, such as coal from the Usibelli coal mine near 
 to Seward and gravel from the 
 to Anchorage. It is well known for its summertime tour passenger service.

The Alaska Railroad was one of the last railroads in North America to use 
 in regular service and still uses them on some gravel trains. It continues to offer one of the last 
 routes in the country. A stretch of about 60 miles (100 km) of track along an area north of Talkeetna remains inaccessible by road; the railroad provides the only transportation to rural homes and cabins in the area. Until construction of the Parks Highway in the 1970s, the railroad provided the only land access to most of the region along its entire route.

In northern Southeast Alaska, the 
 also partly runs through the state from 
 northwards into Canada (British Columbia and Yukon Territory), crossing the border at 
 Summit. This line is now mainly used by tourists, often arriving by cruise liner at Skagway. It was featured in the 1983 
 television series 


The Alaska Rail network is not connected to Outside. (The nearest link to the North American railway network is the northwest terminus of the 
 at 
, several hundred miles to the southeast.) In 2000, the U.S. Congress authorized $6 million to study the feasibility of a rail link between Alaska, Canada, and the lower 48.


Some private companies provides 
 service between 
 and 
.

An 
 locomotive over a bridge in Girdwood approaching Anchorage (2007)

The 
 traverses rugged terrain north of 
 near the 
.

Many cities, towns and villages in the state do not have road or highway access; the only modes of access involve travel by air, river, or the sea.

Alaska's well-developed state-owned ferry system (known as the 
) serves the cities of 
, the Gulf Coast and the Alaska Peninsula. The ferries transport vehicles as well as passengers. The system also operates a ferry service from 
 and 
, in Canada through the 
 to 
. The 
 also serves as an important marine link for many communities in the 
 region of Southeast and works in concert with the Alaska Marine Highway.

In recent years, cruise lines have created a summertime tourism market, mainly connecting the Pacific Northwest to Southeast Alaska and, to a lesser degree, towns along Alaska's gulf coast. The population of 
 for example fluctuates dramatically on many days—up to four large cruise ships can dock there at the same time.

Cities not served by road, sea, or river can be reached only by air, foot, 
, or 
, accounting for Alaska's extremely well developed 
 air services—an Alaskan novelty. Anchorage and, to a lesser extent Fairbanks, is served by 
. Because of limited highway access, air travel remains the most efficient form of transportation in and out of the state. Anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and construction at 
 to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism (in 2012–2013, Alaska received almost two million visitors).


Regular flights to most villages and towns within the state that are commercially viable are challenging to provide, so they are heavily subsidized by the federal government through the 
 program. 
 is the only major airline offering in-state travel with jet service (sometimes in combination cargo and passenger 
-400s) from Anchorage and 
 to regional hubs like 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and other larger communities as well as to major Southeast and Alaska Peninsula communities.

The bulk of remaining commercial flight offerings come from small regional commuter airlines such as 
, 
, and 
. The smallest towns and villages must rely on scheduled or chartered bush flying services using general aviation aircraft such as the 
, the most popular aircraft in use in the state. Much of this service can be attributed to the Alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to Alaskan rural communities. The program requires 70% of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service to the communities.

Many communities have small air taxi services. These operations originated from the demand for customized transport to remote areas. Perhaps the most quintessentially Alaskan plane is the bush seaplane. The world's busiest seaplane base is 
, located next to Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, where flights bound for remote villages without an airstrip carry passengers, cargo, and many items from stores and warehouse clubs.

In 2006, Alaska had the highest number of pilots per capita of any U.S. state.
 In Alaska there are 8,795 active pilot certificates as of 2020. 

 Of these, there are 2,507 Private, 1,496 Commercial, 2,180 Airline Transport, and 2,239 student pilots. There are also 3,987 pilots with an Instrument rating and 1,511 Flight Instructors.

Another Alaskan transportation method is the 
. In modern times (that is, any time after the mid-late 1920s), dog 
 is more of a sport than a true means of transportation. Various races are held around the state, but the best known is the 
, a 1,150-mile (1,850 km) trail from Anchorage to Nome (although the distance varies from year to year, the official distance is set at 1,049 miles or 1,688 km). The race commemorates the famous 
 in which mushers and dogs like 
 and 
 took much-needed medicine to the 
-stricken community of 
 when all other means of transportation had failed. Mushers from all over the world come to Anchorage each March to compete for cash, prizes, and prestige. The "Serum Run" is another sled dog race that more accurately follows the route of the famous 1925 relay, leaving from the community of 
 (southwest of Fairbanks) to Nome.


In areas not served by road or rail, primary transportation in summer is by 
 and in winter by 
 or "snow machine", as it is commonly referred to in Alaska.


Alaska's internet and other data transport systems are provided largely through the two major telecommunications companies: 
 and 
. GCI owns and operates what it calls the Alaska United Fiber Optic system
 and, as of late 2011, Alaska Communications advertised that it has "two fiber optic paths to the lower 48 and two more across Alaska.
 In January 2011, it was reported that a $1 billion project to connect Asia and rural Alaska was being planned, aided in part by $350 million in stimulus from the federal government.


Like all other U.S. states, Alaska is governed as a republic, with three 
: an 
 consisting of the 
 and their appointees which head executive departments; a 
 consisting of the 
 and 
; and a 
 consisting of the 
 and lower courts.

The state of Alaska employs approximately 16,000 people statewide.


The 
 consists of a 40-member 
 and a 20-member 
. Senators serve four-year terms and House members two. The 
 serves four-year terms. The 
 runs separately from the governor in the 
, but during the general election, the nominee for governor and nominee for lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket.

Alaska's court system has four levels: the 
, the 
, the superior courts and the district courts.
 The superior and district courts are 
. Superior courts are courts of general jurisdiction, while district courts hear only certain types of cases, including misdemeanor criminal cases and civil cases valued up to $100,000.


The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals are 
. The Court of Appeals is required to hear appeals from certain lower-court decisions, including those regarding criminal prosecutions, juvenile delinquency, and 
.
 The Supreme Court hears civil appeals and may in its discretion hear criminal appeals.


Although in its early years of statehood Alaska was a 
 state, since the early 1970s it has been characterized as 
-leaning.
 Local political communities have often worked on issues related to land use development, fishing, tourism, and individual rights. 
, while organized in and around their communities, have been active within the 
. These have been given ownership over large tracts of land, which require stewardship.

Alaska was formerly the only state in which possession of one ounce or less of marijuana in one's home was completely legal under state law, though the federal law remains in force.


The state has an independence movement favoring a vote on secession from the United States, with the 
.


Six 
 and four 
 have served as governor of Alaska. In addition, Republican governor 
 was elected to the office for a second term in 1990 after leaving the Republican party and briefly joining the Alaskan Independence Party ticket just long enough to be reelected. He officially rejoined the Republican party in 1994.

Alaska's 
 took effect on February 24, 2015, placing Alaska alongside Colorado and Washington as the first three U.S. states where recreational marijuana is legal. The new law means people over 21 can consume small amounts of cannabis.
 The first legal marijuana store opened in Valdez in October 2016.


To finance state government operations, Alaska depends primarily on petroleum revenues and federal subsidies. This allows it to have the lowest individual tax burden in the United States.
 It is one of five states with no 
, one of seven states with no individual 
, and—along with 
—one of two that has neither.
 The Department of Revenue Tax Division
 reports regularly on the state's revenue sources. The department also issues an annual summary of its operations, including new state laws that directly affect the tax division. In 2014, the 
 ranked Alaska as having the fourth most "business friendly" tax policy, behind only 
, 
, and 
.


While Alaska has no state sales tax, 89 municipalities collect a local sales tax, from 1.0 to 7.5%, typically 3–5%. Other local taxes levied include raw fish taxes, hotel, motel, and bed-and-breakfast 'bed' taxes, 
, liquor and tobacco taxes, gaming (pull tabs) taxes, tire taxes and fuel transfer taxes. A part of the revenue collected from certain state taxes and license fees (such as petroleum, aviation motor fuel, telephone cooperative) is shared with municipalities in Alaska.

The fall in oil prices after the 
 in the early 2010s has decimated Alaska's state treasury, which has historically received about 85 percent of its revenue from taxes and fees imposed on oil and gas companies.
 The state government has had to drastically reduce its budget, and has brought its budget shortfall from over $2 billion in 2016 to under $500 million by 2018. In 2020, Alaska's state government budget was $4.8 billion, while projected government revenues were only $4.5 billion.


Alaska regularly supports 
 in presidential elections and has done so since statehood. Republicans have won the state's 
 votes in all but one election that it has participated in (
). No state has voted for a 
 presidential candidate fewer times. Alaska was carried by Democratic nominee 
 during his landslide election in 
, while the 
 and 
 elections were close. Since 
, however, Republicans have carried the state by large margins. In 
, Republican 
 defeated Democrat 
 in Alaska, 59.49% to 37.83%. McCain's running mate was 
, the state's governor and the first Alaskan on a major party ticket. Obama lost Alaska again in 
, but he captured 40% of the state's vote in that election, making him the first Democrat to do so since 1968. In 
, 
 received 42.77% of the vote for president, marking the high point for a Democratic presidential candidate since Johnson's 1964 victory.

The 
, central Juneau, midtown and downtown Anchorage, and the areas surrounding the 
 campus and Ester have been strongholds of the Democratic Party. The Matanuska-Susitna Borough, the majority of Fairbanks (including North Pole and the military base), and South Anchorage typically have the strongest Republican showing.

Alaska has had a long history of primary defeats for incumbent U.S. Senators, with 
, 
 and 
 all being defeated for the nomination to their re-election. However, Murkowski 
 with a write-in campaign. Despite this, Alaska has had some long-serving congressmen, with 
 serving as U.S. Senator for 40 years, and 
 serving as the at-large representative for 49 years.

In a 2020 study, Alaska was ranked as the 15th hardest state for citizens to vote in.


In the 
 cycle, Alaskan voters approved Ballot Measure 2.
 The measure passed by a margin of 1.1%, or about 4,000 votes.
 The measure requires campaigns to disclose the original source and any intermediaries for campaign contributions over $2,000. The measure also establishes 
 for statewide elections (like in 
 and 
) and 
 (like in 
).
 Measure 2 makes Alaska the third state with 
 for all statewide races, the second state with 
, and the only state with both.

The first race to use the new system of elections was the 
 to fill Alaska's only U.S. House seat, left vacant by the death of 
, won by 
, the first Democrat to win the House seat since 
, and the first 
 to be elected to the 
 in history.

, 


, 


, senior 


, junior United States senator

, United States 




 (
 
) is a 
 
 
 written in Python and developed in Cambuslang. Originally designed for 
, it can also be used to extract data using 
 or as a general-purpose web crawler.
  It is currently maintained by 
 (formerly 
), a web-scraping development and services company.

Scrapy project architecture is built around "spiders", which are self-contained crawlers that are given a set of instructions. Following the spirit of other 
 frameworks, such as 
,
 it makes it easier to build and scale large crawling projects by allowing developers to reuse their code.

The Scrapy framework provides you with powerful features such as auto-throttle, rotating proxies and user-agents, allowing you scrape virtually undetected across the net. Scrapy also provides a web-crawling 
, which can be used by developers to test their assumptions on a site’s behavior.


Some well-known companies and products using Scrapy are: Lyst,
 
,
 
,
 
 Medialab,
 
’s World Government Data site.


Scrapy was born at London-based web-aggregation and e-commerce company Mydeco, where it was developed and maintained by employees of Mydeco and Insophia (a web-consulting company based in 
, Uruguay). The first public release was in August 2008 under the 
, with a milestone 1.0 release happening in June 2015.
 In 2011, Zyte (formerly Scrapinghub) became the new official maintainer.


In 
, a 
 is a 
 for building 
 in a wide variety of application 
. Conversely, a 
 is used within a specific area. For example, 
 was specifically designed for 
.

Early programming languages were designed either for scientific computing (numerical calculations) or commercial data processing, as was computer hardware. Scientific languages such as 
 and 
 supported floating-point calculations and multidimensional arrays, while business languages such as 
 supported fixed-field file formats and 
. Much less widely used were specialized languages such as 
 and 
 for 
; 
 for string manipulation; 
 for 
. 
 requiring 
 was typically done in 
, though 
 was used for some military applications.


's 
, announced in 1964, was designed as a unified hardware architecture supporting both scientific and commercial applications, and IBM developed 
 for it as a single, general-purpose language that supported scientific, commercial, and systems programming. Indeed, a subset of PL/I was used as the standard systems programming language for the 
 operating system.

Since PL/I, the distinction between scientific and commercial programming languages has diminished, with most languages supporting the basic features required by both, and much of the special file format handling delegated to specialized 
.

Many specialized languages were also developed starting in the 1960s: 
 and 
 for discrete event simulation; 
, 
, 
, and 
 for teaching programming; 
 for systems programming; 
 and 
 for interactive programming.


The distinction between general-purpose programming languages and domain-specific programming languages is not always clear.
 A programming language may be created for a specific task, but used beyond that original domain and thus be considered a general purpose programming language.  For example, 
, 
, and 
 were created as DSLs (for business processing, numeric computation, and symbolic processing), but became GPL’s over time.
 Inversely, a language may be designed for general use but only applied in a specific area in practice.
 A programming language that is well suited for a problem, whether it be general-purpose language or DSL, should minimize the level of detail required while still being expressive enough in the problem domain.
 As the name suggests, general-purpose language is “general” in that it cannot provide support for domain-specific notation while DSLs can be designed in diverse problem domains to handle this problem.
 General-purpose languages are preferred to DSLs when an application domain is not well understood enough to warrant its own language. In this case, a general-purpose language with an appropriate library of data types and functions for the domain may be used instead.
 While DSLs are usually smaller than GPL in that they offer a smaller range of notations of abstractions, some DSLs actually contain an entire GPL as a sublanguage. In these instances, the DSLs are able to offer domain-specific expressive power along with the expressive power of GPL.


General Purpose programming languages are all 
, meaning that they can theoretically solve any computational problem. Domain-specific languages are often similarly Turing complete but are not exclusively so.

General-purpose programming languages are more commonly used by programmers.  According to a study, 
, 
, and 
 were the most commonly used programming languages in 2021.
 One argument in favor of using general-purpose programming languages over domain-specific languages is that more people will be familiar with these languages, overcoming the need to learn a new language.

Additionally, for many tasks (e.g., statistical analysis, machine learning, etc.) there are libraries that are extensively tested and optimized. Theoretically, the presence of these libraries should bridge the gap between general-purpose and domain-specific languages.


An empirical study in 2010 sought to measure problem-solving and productivity between GPLs and CSLs by giving users problems who were familiar with the GPL (
) and unfamiliar with the DSL (
).  Ultimately, users of this specific domain-specific language performed better by a factor of 15%, even though they were more familiar with GPL, warranting further research.


The predecessor to 
, 
, was developed largely for a specific purpose: 
.
 By contrast, C has found use in a variety of computational domains, such as 
, 
, 
, and 
.

C is suitable for use in a variety of areas because of its generality. It provides economy of expression, flow control, data structures, and a rich set of operators, but does not constrain its users to use it in any one context.
 As a result, though it was first used by its creators to rewrite the kernel of the 
 operating system,
 it was easily adapted for use in application development, embedded systems (e.g., microprocessor programming), video games (e.g., 
), and so on. Today, C remains one of the most popular and widely-used programming languages.


Conceived as an extension to 
, 
 introduced 
 features, as well as other conveniences like references, operator overloading, and default arguments. Like 
, 
 generality allowed it to be used in a wide range of areas. While its 
’s core area of application is in systems programming (because of 
’s ability to grant access to low-level architecture),
 it has been used extensively to build desktop applications, video games, databases, financial systems, and much more.
 Major software and finance companies, such as 
, 
, 
, and 
, still widely use C++ in their internal and external applications.


 was conceived as a language that emphasized code readability and extensibility.
 The former allowed non-software engineers to easily learn and write computer programs, while the latter allowed domain specialists to easily create libraries suited to their own use cases. For these reasons, Python has been used across a wide range of domains.

Below are some of the areas where Python is used:


The following are some general-purpose programming languages:


				Pages for logged out editors 

			
 is a 
 of 
 plesiosaur from the 
 of England, known from the 
. Its sole 
 was originally named 
 by 
 in 1869 before 
 gave it its own genus in 1889. It is known from many specimens, some very complete. It had a total length of 3.5 to 4 metres (11 to 13 ft), and a large, triangular skull elongated into a narrow 
 with conical teeth. The two sides of its 
 (lower jaw) were fused into a long 
 at the front. Its neck was short for a 
 and its limbs were modified into flippers, with the back pair larger than the front. 
 is classified in 
 with other short-necked pliosaurids. It was well-adapted to aquatic life, using its flippers for swimming, and its skull was reinforced against the stresses of feeding. 
 long, narrow snout could have been swung through the water to catch fish with its sharp teeth. (
)



The 
 is a hotel in 
, built in the Elizabethan 
 architectural style. Opened in 1922, it was purchased in 1960 by Helen Barnum, the matriarch of a successful timber family in the county, before being sold to John Biord after Barnum's death in 1993. In 2004, the inn was closed after tax defaults by its owner, reopening in 2010 after the businessman Libo Zhu purchased and refurbished it. In February 1982, the structure was listed on the 
. This photograph shows the Eureka Inn's entrance hall as seen in 2020.

Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the 
, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer 
:

This Wikipedia is written in 
. Many 
; some of the largest are listed below.



 was a 
 
 (one of the "
") of 
's 
, built for service in 
. She was ordered on 6 November 1943, and was 
 on 19 July 1944 at 
, 
, as yard number 1652. She was 
 on 16 September 1944, and 
 under the command of 
 Otto Niethmann on 19 October 1944.


Like all 
 
, 
 had a displacement of 1,621 tonnes (1,595 long tons) when at the surface and 1,819 tonnes (1,790 long tons) while submerged. She had a total length of 76.70 m (251 ft 8 in) (
), a beam of 8 m (26 ft 3 in), and a draught of 6.32 m (20 ft 9 in).
 The submarine was powered by two 
 supercharged six-cylinder M6V40/46KBB diesel engines each providing 4,000 
 (2,900 
; 3,900 
), two 
 GU365/30 
 electric motors each providing 5,000 PS (3,700 kW; 4,900 shp), and two Siemens-Schuckert 
 GV232/28 electric motors each providing 226 PS (166 kW; 223 shp).


The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 15.6 knots (28.9 km/h; 18.0 mph) and a submerged speed of 17.2 knots (31.9 km/h; 19.8 mph). When running on silent motors the boat could operate at a speed of 6.1 knots (11.3 km/h; 7.0 mph). When submerged, the boat could operate at 5 knots (9.3 km/h; 5.8 mph) for 340 nautical miles (630 km; 390 mi); when surfaced, she could travel 15,500 nautical miles (28,700 km; 17,800 mi) at 10 knots (19 km/h; 12 mph).
 
 was fitted with six 53.3 cm (21.0 in) 
 in the bow and four 
 
. She could carry twenty-three 
 or seventeen torpedoes and twelve 
. The 
 was five officers and fifty-two men.


 was 
 on 3 May 1945, at 
, as part of 
. The wreck was later raised and broken up.



				Pages for logged out editors 

			
 (
: 
) is a 
 and 
 in 
 in the 
 of north-eastern 
.

In 
 the 
 was first mentioned in 1414.

The 
 lies at an 
 of 284 meters and covers an 
 consisting of 7.942 km². It has a 
 of about 191 people.



This 
 
 article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.


 is a genus of 
 in family 
. Species of 
 are 
, specialized on a relatively small number of plant species. 

Their host plants include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
, although mallows are the most common and likely ancestral host plant for the whole genus. Its tribe is 
.

In the 
, 
 is considered the "cactus bee" as it feeds almost exclusively on a number of Sonoran Desert cactus species, its life cycle revolving around the flowering of the native species of cacti.


These 42 species belong to the genus 
.




This 
 article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.

				Pages for logged out editors 

			
Redirect to:

				Pages for logged out editors 

			
 
 is a village in the administrative district of 
, within 
, 
, in north-central Poland.
 It lies 11 kilometres (7 mi) west of 
 and 21 km (13 mi) south of 
. It is located in the region of 
.

During 
, Opoczki was 
. The Germans renamed it to 
 in attempt to erase traces of Polish origin. In 1939–1940, they carried out 
, whose farms were then handed over to 
 as part of the 
 policy.
 Expelled Poles were either deported to the 
 in the more eastern part of German-occupied Poland or enslaved as 
 of German colonists in the area.






This 
 location article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.

				Pages for logged out editors 

			




 was a Japanese organization advocating the 
 of the 
 and the establishment of a republican form. The full name is 
 (
) meaning Anti-Imperial System National Individuals' Joint Struggle Committee. The group was started in 1987 by a radical group of students at 
 in 
 and 
. They often used street performances to spread their message.


In 1996 members of Aki no Arashi won a lawsuit against the 
 for 
 and battery by 
. The events took place during a series of rallies organized by the group in 1989, after the death of 
.


This article about an organization or organization-related topic in Japan is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.

				Pages for logged out editors 

			


 is a 
 in the family 
. It was described by 
 in 1920. It is found in 
.





This article relating to the 
 
 is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.

				Pages for logged out editors 

			
The 
, 
 
 or 
, was a 
 held in 
 in 1909 publicizing the development of the 
. It was originally planned for 1907 to mark the 10th anniversary of the 
, but the organizers learned of the 
 being held that same year and rescheduled.

The fairgrounds became the campus of the 
.

Godfrey Chealander proposed the idea for the fair. Chealander was then Grand Secretary of the 
, was involved in the 
 exhibit at the 1905 
 in 
, 
. Originally, he pitched William Sheffield of the Alaska Club and James A. Wood, city editor of the 
 on the idea of a permanent exhibit in Seattle about Alaska. This merged with Wood's desire for an exposition to rival Portland. They soon gained the backing of 
 publisher 
—remarkably, for the time, without gaining the opposition of the rival 
.
 Among other early proponents of the exposition was John Edward Chilberg, one of a line of prominent Seattle merchants in the 
 family, who was president of the Alaska Club, and was then given the title of president of the Exposition.


 proposed that the exposition be held on the then largely forested campus of the 
, which in 1905 had exactly three buildings and little deliberate landscaping. At the time, this was considered rather far from the center of town, but Meany eventually sold the others involved on the idea that the forested campus could, itself, be an attraction for out-of-town visitors and that the 
 ride from downtown would not be an obstacle to attendance. Of course, he was also highly aware of what the landscaping and structures could do for the campus.


The 
 endorsed the fair, with the proviso that it would produce at least four permanent buildings, and that any state monetary contribution would be focused mainly on those buildings. 
 (the county in which Seattle is located) stepped up with US$300,000 for a 
 exhibit—the largest 
 ever built—and $78,000 for other exhibits. Because the original Klondike gold strikes had been in 
, the concept soon evolved to an "Alaska-Yukon Exposition"; later, at the behest of the 
, the "Pacific" theme was also added to emphasize the Oriental trade.
 The Exposition became known as the "A-Y-P" for short


Although the fair almost certainly could have been ready for 1907, it was postponed so as not to conflict with the 
. This turned out to be good fortune for Seattle, because 1907 proved to be a bad year for the economy. If the exposition had been held that year it almost certainly would have been a financial failure, rather than the success it was in 1909.


The 
 of Brookline, Massachusetts, were selected to plan the Exposition; the firm was already involved in planning parks and parkways for the City of Seattle. 
 visited Seattle in October 1906 and saw the dominant form of 
 toward the southeast. He selected the mountain as the focus of the primary axis of the Exposition. This axis later became the 
 of the University of Washington campus.

The principal landscape architect for the fair was the Olmsted firm's 
. His design centered on a long pool with a series of short waterfalls along Rainier Vista.
 
 firm, Howard and Galloway, based in San Francisco, was chosen as supervising architects for the Exposition buildings. They designed several buildings and supervised construction of those designed by other architects.

The fairgrounds were entirely ready for the June 1, 1909, opening.


The only foreign countries to erect entire buildings at the fair were 
 and Canada, but their presence was enough to validate the "Pacific" theme along with the US territory of 
 and the 
, recently ceded to the US by Spain. Other foreign countries were represented on a smaller scale. The very popular King County exhibit included a scale model of the 
 at nearby 
 and 
 of several Seattle scenes, the originals of which were only a trolley ride away. The Woman's Building emphasized the role of women in pioneering the 
 and in current charity work. The Pay Streak was Seattle's answer to Chicago's 
 and featured games of chance and amusements. There was also a reenactment of the 
 naval 
 (the Battle of 
 and 
).


The Forestry Building.

The Hoo-Hoo House and Bastion, which became the UW Faculty Lounge until torn down and replaced mid-century.

Display of 
 fruits.

Installing the statue of 
 that remains on the University of Washington campus

The 
 style 
 gate at the South entrance

The gates opened at 8:30 a.m. on June 1, and crowds entered immediately. At 9:30 a.m., attendees watched performances by military bands from the Army and the Navy.  Many sat in the fair's amphitheater, awaiting a signal scheduled to be given in Washington, D.C.  At 3 p.m. East Coast time (noon in Seattle), in the East Room of the White House, President Taft sent the signal.  He "opened...the Exposition...by touching a gold [telegraph] key, studded with gold nuggets taken from the first mine opened in the Klondike region."
 The telegraphic spark that Taft sent was received by telegraphers at the fairgrounds; as soon as it arrived, a gong was struck five times, a large American flag was unfurled, and there was a 21-gun salute, while other demonstrations of pageantry announced the official opening of the fair.


Opening Day, June 1, was declared a city holiday, and 80,000 people attended.
 Attendance was even higher—117,013—on "Seattle Day".
 Other big draws were days dedicated to various ethnic groups, fraternal organizations, and U.S. states.
 By the time the fair closed on October 16, more than 3,700,000 people had visited.

The fair had its own publicity department, and it used newspapers and magazines to promote the upcoming exhibition well in advance. In early 1908, Seattle newspapers reported that the publicity department was already showing positive results and the fair was earning many favorable mentions in publications all over the United States.
 The publicists stressed that this exhibition would be far better organized than 1907's 
, and would feature impressive entertainment. But what many newspapers found interesting was the assertion that this next World's Fair would not require any financial assistance or subsidies from the U.S. government; the only request made by the fair's directors was that the United States erect buildings and exhibits like any other country.


Throughout 1908, as each new exhibit was built and the fair gradually began to take shape, publicity about the fair's progress was sent out, and frequently printed, nearly verbatim, from the press releases. For example, the 
 in 
, 
, printed a story about how the fair would have motor boat races:  the article noted that the pavilion for the event was being built on "one of the prettiest spots on the exposition's shoreline." The article praised Puget Sound for being an area perfect for motor boating enthusiasts, and concluded by saying, "The climate is such that motor boating can be enjoyed all the year round."


By early 1909, the focus turned to who was going to attend, as many local newspapers in distant locations wrote articles about residents of their state who planned to make the trip out to Seattle. Also helpful was the fact that several major newspaper conventions were scheduled for the west coast, and the editors were said to be very interested in visiting the fair.
  The fair's organizers were also able to benefit from advertisements placed in newspapers by the railroads, which encouraged people to travel by rail to Seattle. One such ad, for the Great Northern Railway, promoted the train as the best way to enjoy a scenic trip: "an attractive route over the Rockies and through the Cascades" before finally arriving at what was sure to be "the World's Most Beautiful Fair."


The primary physical legacy of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition is the planning framework from the fair which continues to shape the University of Washington campus. The Rainier Vista and 
, the focus of the A-Y-P, are today the central focus of the Science Quadrangle of the university's overall plan.

Although most of the Exposition's buildings were designed as temporary structures, intended to last only for the duration of the fair, some were more permanent. The Fine Arts Palace was designed by Howard and Galloway as a chemistry building. It was used during the A-Y-P for the exhibit of art. After the Exposition was over, chemistry lab tables and other furnishings were moved in and it became the University's primary facility for teaching chemistry. The building was named Bagley Hall (after 
) and retained that name until 1937, when a new chemistry building named Bagley Hall opened. The older building then became the home of Architecture and Physiology. The building survives today, albeit with extensive renovation and restoration, and is known as Architecture Hall.

The A-Y-P Women's Building also survives. During the fair it housed exhibits related to women. Today the building is named Cunningham Hall (after 
), one of only a few buildings on the University of Washington campus named for women. During the Exposition itself the building was clad in stucco; today it is faced in wood siding. The building now houses various educational and other programs related to women.

Other buildings from the A-Y-P survived for a time, but were subsequently demolished as the university grew. The Forestry Building was demolished mid-century after the natural logs of the structure proved difficult to maintain and few alternative uses for the structure were found. It stood on the site of the current 
 (HUB). The original Meany Hall, the AYP Auditorium Hall, was damaged by an 
 and subsequently demolished. Another example is the Hoo-Hoo-House, designed by architect 
, a clubhouse with reception spaces constructed for the 
, a lumbermen's fraternity. After the fair, this building served as the faculty club until it was replaced in 1958–60 by the current faculty club.

Another legacy of the fair was the enhanced status of exposition president J. E. Chilberg. Although a respected banker, Chilberg had never really been one of the city's elite. He was drafted into his position with the fair simply as a man who was known to be good at getting things done, but without consideration by the city's elite that they had just made an outsider into something tantamount to royalty for the duration of a social season. Suddenly, any party at their 
 home became a major event in the social calendar. He and his wife found themselves dining with a close relative of the 
 and hosting a 
 ambassador.


The 
, originally erected for the fair, now stands in 
.

, founder of 
, stated that it was during the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition when he saw a manned flying machine for the first time and became fascinated with aircraft.

Because the Exposition buildings were built with non-union labor, various unions protested against the exposition in actions ranging from pamphleteering to boycotts. The Central Labor Council organized a protest march outside the grounds on 
. The 
 editorialized that the Exposition was, "a great fantastic monument to the brutal avarice of the capitalist class."


A month-old orphaned boy named Ernest was raffled away as a prize. Although a winning ticket was drawn, nobody claimed the prize. The ultimate destiny of the child was still being investigated in 2009.


Other human exhibits included displays presenting 
 people from the Philippines as dog-eating, primitive people; the "Alaskan Siberians — Eskimos"; and a Chinese village depicting 
 and recounting the recent 
.
 The Igorot exhibit spawned a letter of protest to the 
 signed by over 100 Filipino merchant marines, although some local resident Filipinos responded to the letter by defending the exhibit.


Premature babies were also displayed in French physician 
's 
, decades before such systems were commonplace in hospitals. This display was not unique to the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition; babies had been displayed in incubators since the 
 (and Seattle itself had seen at least two such exhibits before the A-Y-P Exposition
). Given the robustness of the infants seen in photographs, there is some question as to whether these infants actually required extra care or if they were simply used for profit. Particular to this exhibit was a Baby Incubator Cafe which is seen in some photos, although historians are unsure if this was an actual cafe or rather a place to view babies feeding. At the time there was little in the way of protest from either fair-goers or physicians. In fact there was already a seasonal incubator exhibit at Luna Park in West Seattle, the Infant Electrobator concession. The babies were mentioned by name in the newspaper during their stay at the exposition and their medical state followed throughout. A specific point of interest was the range in ethnicity of the infants. No deaths were experienced amongst the babies at the exhibit.


The year 2009 was the centennial of the Alaska–Yukon–Pacific Exposition. The City and University held various activities to celebrate this anniversary.

A documentary was produced by 
 called "AYP-Seattle's Forgotten World's Fair" for 
.


On July 4, 2009, a group of 12 cyclists set off from 
, on a 1,000 mile bike ride to Seattle, Washington, to support the disease 
. The ride, titled 
, was a centennial of the 1909 adventure of Vic McDaniel and Ray Francisco who traveled on bicycles to the Exposition. The ride ended at the Drumheller Fountain, in the center of Frosh Pond on the campus of the University of Washington on July 16, 2009. Drumheller Fountain is one of the last known remnants from the 1909 fair.


				Pages for logged out editors 

			




 is a 
, 
. Its design philosophy emphasizes 
 with the use of 
.


Python is 
 and 
. It supports multiple 
, including 
 (particularly 
), 
 and 
. It is often described as a "batteries included" language due to its comprehensive 
.


 began working on Python in the late 1980s as a successor to the 
 and first released it in 1991 as Python 0.9.0.
 Python 2.0 was released in 2000 and introduced new features such as 
, 
 garbage collection, 
, and 
 support. Python 3.0, released in 2008, was a major revision  not completely 
 with earlier versions. Python 2.7.18, released in 2020, was the last release of Python 2.


Python consistently ranks as one of the most popular programming languages.


Python was conceived in the late 1980s
 by 
 at 
 (CWI) in the 
 as a successor to the 
, which was inspired by 
,
 capable of 
 (from the start plus new capabilities in Python 3.11) and interfacing with the 
 operating system.
 Its implementation began in December 1989.
 Van Rossum shouldered sole responsibility for the project, as the lead developer, until 12 July 2018, when he announced his "permanent vacation" from his responsibilities as Python's "
", a title the Python community bestowed upon him to reflect his long-term commitment as the project's chief decision-maker.
 In January 2019, active Python core developers elected a five-member Steering Council to lead the project.


Python 2.0 was released on 16 October 2000, with many major new features.
 Python 3.0, released on 3 December 2008, with many of its major features 
 to Python 2.6.x
 and 2.7.x.  Releases of Python 3 include the 
 utility, which automates the translation of Python 2 code to Python 3.


Python 2.7's 
 was initially set for 2015, then postponed to 2020 out of concern that a large body of existing code could not easily be forward-ported to Python 3.
  No further security patches or other improvements will be released for it.
 Currently only 3.7 and later are supported. In 2021, Python 3.9.2 and 3.8.8 were expedited
 as all versions of Python (including 2.7
) had security issues leading to possible 
 and 
.


In 2022, Python 3.10.4 and 3.9.12 were expedited
 and 3.8.13, and 3.7.13, because of many security issues.
 When Python 3.9.13 was released in May 2022, it was announced that the 3.9 series (joining the older series 3.8 and 3.7) will only receive security fixes going forward.
 On September 7, 2022, four new releases were made due to a potential 
: 3.10.7, 3.9.14, 3.8.14, and 3.7.14.


As of November 2022,
 Python 3.11.0 is the current stable release and among the notable changes from 3.10 are that it is 10–60% faster and significantly improved error reporting.


Python 3.12 (alpha 2) has improved error messages.

The deprecated 
 module has been removed from Python 3.12 (alpha). And a number of other old, broken and deprecated functions (e.g. from 
 module), classes and methods have been removed. The deprecated 
 and 
 length members of the 
 implementation of 
 objects were removed,
 to make 
 the default in later Python versions.

Historically, Python 3 also made changes from Python 2, e.g. changed the division operator.

Python is a 
. 
 and 
 are fully supported, and many of their features support functional programming and 
 (including 
 and 
).
 Many other paradigms are supported via extensions, including 
 and 
.


Python uses 
 and a combination of 
 and a cycle-detecting garbage collector for 
.
 It uses dynamic 
 (
), which binds method and variable names during program execution.

Its design offers some support for functional programming in the 
 tradition. It has 
,
and
 functions; 
, 
, sets, and 
 expressions.
 The standard library has two modules (
 and 
) that implement functional tools borrowed from 
 and 
.


Its core philosophy is summarized in the document 
 (
), which includes 
 such as:


Rather than building all of its functionality into its core, Python was designed to be highly 
 via modules. This compact modularity has made it particularly popular as a means of adding programmable interfaces to existing applications. Van Rossum's vision of a small core language with a large standard library and easily extensible interpreter stemmed from his frustrations with 
, which espoused the opposite approach.


Python strives for a simpler, less-cluttered syntax and grammar while giving developers a choice in their coding methodology. In contrast to 
's "
" motto, Python embraces a "there should be one—and preferably only one—obvious way to do it"  philosophy.
 
, a 
 at the 
 and Python book author, wrote: "To describe something as 'clever' is 
 considered a compliment in the Python culture."


Python's developers strive to avoid 
 and reject patches to non-critical parts of the 
 reference implementation that would offer marginal increases in speed at the cost of clarity.
 When speed is important, a Python programmer can move time-critical functions to extension modules written in languages such as C; or use 
, a 
. 
 is also available, which translates a Python script into C and makes direct C-level API calls into the Python interpreter.

Python's developers aim for it to be fun to use. This is reflected in its name—a tribute to the British comedy group 
—and in occasionally playful approaches to tutorials and reference materials, such as the use of the terms "spam", and "eggs" (a reference to 
) in examples, instead of the often-used 
.


A common 
 in the Python community is 
, which has a wide range of meanings related to program style. "Pythonic" code may use Python idioms well, be natural or show fluency in the language, or conform with Python's minimalist philosophy and emphasis on readability. Code that is difficult to understand or reads like a rough transcription from another programming language is called 
.


Python users and admirers, especially those considered knowledgeable or experienced, are often referred to as 
.


Python is meant to be an easily readable language. Its formatting is visually uncluttered and often uses English keywords where other languages use punctuation. Unlike many other languages, it does not use 
 to delimit blocks, and semicolons after statements are allowed but rarely used. It has fewer syntactic exceptions and special cases than 
 or 
.


Python uses 
 indentation, rather than 
 or keywords, to delimit 
. An increase in indentation comes after certain statements; a decrease in indentation signifies the end of the current block.
 Thus, the program's visual structure accurately represents its semantic structure.
 This feature is sometimes termed the 
. Some other languages use indentation this way; but in most, indentation has no semantic meaning. The recommended indent size is four spaces.


Python's 
 include:

The assignment statement (
) binds a name as a 
 to a separate, dynamically-allocated 
. Variables may subsequently be rebound at any time to any object. In Python, a variable name is a generic reference holder without a fixed 
; however, it always refers to 
 object with a type. This is called 
—in contrast to 
 languages, where each variable may contain only a value of a certain type.

Python does not support 
 optimization or 
, and, according to Van Rossum, it never will.
 However, better support for 
-like functionality is provided by extending Python's 
.
 Before 2.5, generators were 
 
; data was passed unidirectionally out of the generator. From Python 2.5 on, it is possible to pass data back into a generator function; and from version 3.3, it can be passed through multiple stack levels.


Python's 
 include:

In Python, a distinction between expressions and statements is rigidly enforced, in contrast to languages such as 
, 
, or 
. This leads to duplicating some functionality. For example:

Statements cannot be a part of an expression—so list and other comprehensions or 
, all being expressions, cannot contain statements. A particular case is that an assignment statement such as 
 cannot form part of the conditional expression of a conditional statement. This has the advantage of avoiding a classic C error of mistaking an assignment operator 
 for an equality operator 
 in conditions: 
 is syntactically valid (but probably unintended) C code, but 
 causes a syntax error in Python.

 on objects are 
 attached to the object's class; the syntax 
 is, for normal methods and functions, 
 for 
. Python methods have an explicit 
 parameter to access 
, in contrast to the implicit self (or 
) in some other object-oriented programming languages (e.g., 
, Java, 
, 
).
 Python also provides methods, often called 
 (due to their names beginning and ending with double-underscores), to allow user-defined classes to modify how they are handled by native operations including length, comparison, in 
 and type conversion.


Python uses 
 and has typed objects but untyped variable names. Type constraints are not checked at 
; rather, operations on an object may fail, signifying that it is not of a suitable type. Despite being 
, Python is 
, forbidding operations that are not well-defined (for example, adding a number to a string) rather than silently attempting to make sense of them.

Python allows programmers to define their own types using 
, most often used for 
. New 
 of classes are constructed by calling the class (for example, 
 or 
), and the classes are instances of the 
 
 (itself an instance of itself), allowing metaprogramming and 
.

Before version 3.0, Python had two kinds of classes (both using the same syntax): 
 and 
,
 current Python versions only support the semantics new style.

The long-term plan is to support 
.
 Python's syntax allows specifying static types, but they are not checked in the default implementation, 
. An experimental optional static type-checker, 
, supports compile-time type checking.




Python has the usual symbols for arithmetic operators (
, 
, 
, 
), the floor division operator 
 and the 
 
 (where the remainder can be negative,  e.g. 
). It also has 
 for 
, e.g. 
 and 
, and a matrix‑multiplication operator 
 .
 These operators work like in traditional math; with the same 
, the operators 
 (
 and 
 can also be 
 to represent positive and negative numbers respectively).

The division between integers produces floating-point results. The behavior of division has changed significantly over time:


In Python terms, 
 is 
 (or simply 
), and 
 is 
 
 before version 3.0 is 
.


Rounding towards negative infinity, though different from most languages, adds consistency. For instance, it means that the equation 
 is always true. It also means that the equation 
 is valid for both positive and negative values of 
. However, maintaining the validity of this equation means that while the result of 
 is, as expected, in the 
 [0, 
), where 
 is a positive integer, it has to lie in the interval (
, 0] when 
 is negative.


Python provides a 
 function for 
 a float to the nearest integer. For 
, Python 3 uses 
: 
 and 
 both produce 
.
 Versions before 3 used 
: 
 is 
, 
 is 
.


Python allows boolean expressions with multiple equality relations in a manner that is consistent with general use in mathematics. For example, the expression 
 tests whether 
 is less than 
 and 
 is less than 
.
 C-derived languages interpret this expression differently: in C, the expression would first evaluate 
, resulting in 0 or 1, and that result would then be compared with 
.


Python uses 
 for all integer operations. The 
 type/class in the 
 module provides 
 to a pre-defined arbitrary precision and several rounding modes.
 The 
 class in the 
 module provides arbitrary precision for 
.


Due to Python's extensive mathematics library, and the third-party library 
 that further extends the native capabilities, it is frequently used as a scientific scripting language to aid in problems such as numerical data processing and manipulation.


 program:

Program to calculate the 
 of a positive integer:

Python's large standard library
 provides tools suited to many tasks and is commonly cited as one of its greatest strengths. For Internet-facing applications, many standard formats and protocols such as 
 and 
 are supported. It includes modules for creating 
, connecting to 
, 
, arithmetic with arbitrary-precision decimals,
 manipulating 
, and 
.

Some parts of the standard library are covered by specifications—for example, the 
 (WSGI) implementation 
 follows PEP 333
—but most are specified by their code, internal documentation, and 
. However, because most of the standard library is cross-platform Python code, only a few modules need altering or rewriting for variant implementations.

As of 14 November 2022,
 the 
 (PyPI), the official repository for third-party Python software, contains over 415,000
 packages with a wide range of functionality, including:

Most Python implementations (including CPython) include a 
 (REPL), permitting them to function as a 
 for which users enter statements sequentially and receive results immediately.

Python also comes with an 
 called 
, which is more beginner-oriented.

Other shells, including 
 and 
, add further abilities such as improved auto-completion, session state retention, and 
.

As well as standard desktop 
, there are 
-based IDEs, including 
, for developing science- and math-related programs; 
, a browser-based IDE and hosting environment; and Canopy IDE, a commercial IDE emphasizing 
.


 is the 
 of Python. It is written in C, meeting the 
 standard (Python 3.11 uses 
) with several select 
 features (With later C versions out, it is considered outdated.
  CPython includes its own C extensions, but third-party extensions are not limited to older C versions—e.g. they can be implemented with 
 or C++.
) It 
 Python programs into an intermediate 
 which is then executed by its 
.
 CPython is distributed with a large standard library written in a mixture of C and native Python, and is available for many platforms, including Windows (starting with Python 3.9, the Python installer deliberately fails to install on 
 and 8;
 
 was supported until Python 3.5) and most modern 
 systems, including macOS (and 
 Macs, since Python 3.9.1, with experimental installer) and unofficial support for e.g. 
.
 Platform portability was one of its earliest priorities.
 (During Python 1 and 2 development, even 
 and 
 were supported,
 but support has since been dropped for many platforms.)

Other just-in-time Python compilers have been developed, but are now unsupported:

There are several compilers to high-level object languages, with either unrestricted Python, a restricted subset of Python, or a language similar to Python as the source language:

Specialized:

Older projects (or not to be used with Python 3.x and latest syntax):

Performance comparison of various Python implementations on a non-numerical (combinatorial) workload was presented at EuroSciPy '13.
 Python's performance compared to other programming languages is also benchmarked by 
.


Python's development is conducted largely through the 
 (PEP) process, the primary mechanism for proposing major new features, collecting community input on issues, and documenting Python design decisions.
 Python coding style is covered in PEP 8.
 Outstanding PEPs are reviewed and commented on by the Python community and the steering council.


Enhancement of the language corresponds with the development of the CPython reference implementation. The mailing list python-dev is the primary forum for the language's development. Specific issues were originally discussed in the 
 
 hosted at by the foundation.
 In 2022, all issues and discussions were migrated to 
.
 Development originally took place on a 
 source-code repository running 
, until Python moved to 
 in January 2017.


CPython's public releases come in three types, distinguished by which part of the version number is incremented:

Many 
 are also released as previews and for testing before final releases. Although there is a rough schedule for each release, they are often delayed if the code is not ready. Python's development team monitors the state of the code by running the large 
 suite during development.


The major 
 on Python is 
. There are also special Python mentoring programs, such as 
.

Python 3.10 deprecated 
 (to be removed in Python 3.12; meaning Python extensions
 need to be modified by then),
 and added 
 to the language.


Tools that can generate documentation for Python API include 
 (available as part of the standard library), 
, 
 and its forks, 
 and 
, among others.


Python's name is derived from the British comedy group 
, whom Python creator Guido van Rossum enjoyed while developing the language. Monty Python references appear frequently in Python code and culture;
 for example, the 
 often used in Python literature are 
 instead of the traditional 
.
 The official Python documentation also contains various references to Monty Python routines.


The prefix 
 is used to show that something is related to Python. Examples of the use of this prefix in names of Python applications or libraries include 
, a 
 of 
 to Python (commonly used to create games); 
 and 
, which bind 
 and GTK to Python respectively; and 
, a Python implementation originally written in Python.

Since 2003, Python has consistently ranked in the top ten most popular programming languages in the 
 where as of December 2022
 it was the most popular language (ahead of C, C++, and 
).
 It was selected Programming Language of the Year (for "the highest rise in ratings in a year") in 2007, 2010, 2018, and 2020 (the only language to have done so four times as of 2020
).

An empirical study found that scripting languages, such as Python, are more productive than conventional languages, such as C and Java, for programming problems involving string manipulation and search in a dictionary, and determined that memory consumption was often "better than Java and not much worse than C or C++".


Large organizations that use Python include 
, 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
, 
,
 
,
 and some smaller entities like 
 and 
.
 The social news networking site 
 was written mostly in Python.


Python can serve as a 
 for 
, e.g., via 
 for the 
.
 With 
, a standard API has evolved to facilitate these applications. 
 like 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, Bottle, and 
 support developers in the design and maintenance of complex applications. Pyjs and 
 can be used to develop the client-side of Ajax-based applications. 
 can be used as a 
 to a relational database. 
 is a framework to program communications between computers, and is used (for example) by 
.

Libraries such as 
, 
, and 
 allow the effective use of Python in scientific computing,
 with specialized libraries such as 
 and 
 providing domain-specific functionality. 
 is a 
 with a 
 programmable in Python: its library covers many aspects of 
, including 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 
 has Python bindings with a rich set of features for 
 and 
.


Python is commonly used in 
 projects and machine learning projects with the help of libraries like 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 As a scripting language with a 
, simple syntax, and rich text processing tools, Python is often used for 
.


Python can also be used to create games, with libraries such as 
, which can make 2D games.

Python has been successfully embedded in many software products as a scripting language, including in 
 software such as 
, 3D parametric modelers like 
, 3D animation packages such as 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, the visual effects compositor 
, 2D imaging programs like 
,
 
, 
 and 
,
 and 
 programs like 
 and 
. 
 uses Python as a 
 to show complex structures such as C++ containers. 
 promotes Python as the best choice for writing scripts in 
.
 It has also been used in several video games,
 and has been adopted as first of the three available 
 in 
, the other two being 
 and 
.


Many operating systems include Python as a standard component. It ships with most 
,
 
 (using Python 2.7), 
 (as a package), 
, and 
 (as a package) and can be used from the command line (terminal). Many Linux distributions use installers written in Python: 
 uses the 
 installer, while 
 and 
 use the 
 installer. 
 uses Python in its 
, 
.

Python is used extensively in the 
 industry, including in exploit development.


Most of the 
 software for the 
 XO, developed at 
 since 2008, is written in Python.
 The 
 
 project has adopted Python as its main user-programming language.

 includes Python and intends to replace Java with Python. Its Python Scripting Provider is a core feature
 since Version 4.0 from 7 February 2013.

Python's design and philosophy have influenced many other programming languages:

Python's development practices have also been emulated by other languages. For example, the practice of requiring a document describing the rationale for, and issues surrounding, a change to the language (in Python, a PEP) is also used in 
,
 
,
 and Swift.






 is a genus of 
 in family 
. Species of 
 are 
, specialized on a relatively small number of plant species. 

Their host plants include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
, although mallows are the most common and likely ancestral host plant for the whole genus. Its tribe is 
.

In the 
, 
 is considered the "cactus bee" as it feeds almost exclusively on a number of Sonoran Desert cactus species, its life cycle revolving around the flowering of the native species of cacti.


These 42 species belong to the genus 
.




This 
 article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.



The 
 (
) is the 
 
 of the 
. It is one of the eight 
, and is designated as the Army of the United States in the 
.
 The oldest and most senior branch of the U.S. military in order of precedence,
 the modern U.S. Army has its roots in the 
, which was formed on 14 June 1775 to fight the 
 (1775–1783)—before the United States was established as a country.
 After the Revolutionary War, the 
 created the United States Army on 3 June 1784 to replace the disbanded Continental Army.
 The United States Army considers itself to be a continuation of the Continental Army, and thus considers its institutional inception to be the origin of that armed force in 1775.


The U.S. Army is a 
 and is part of the 
, which is one of the three military departments of the 
. The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the 
 (SECARMY) and by a chief 
, the 
 (CSA) who is also a member of the 
. It is the largest military branch, and in the 
 2020, the projected end strength for the 
 (USA) was 480,893 soldiers; the 
 (ARNG) had 336,129 soldiers and the 
 (USAR) had 188,703 soldiers; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 1,005,725 soldiers.
 As a branch of the armed forces, the mission of the U.S. Army is "to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of 
".
 The branch participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force of the United States.

The United States Army serves as the land-based branch of the 
. 
 defines the purpose of the army as:


In 2018, the 
 articulated an eight-point addendum to the Army Vision for 2028.
 While the Army Mission remains constant, the Army Strategy builds upon the Army's 
 by adding focus to 
 and 
-level echelons.
 The 
 oversees reforms geared toward 
. The Army's current 
 is due to be completed by 2028.


The Army's five core competencies are prompt and sustained land combat, 
 operations (to include combined arms maneuver and wide–area security, armored and mechanized operations and airborne and air assault operations), 
, to set and sustain the theater for the joint force, and to integrate national, multinational, and joint power on land.


The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the 
 as a unified army for the colonies to fight 
, with 
 appointed as its commander.
 The army was initially led by men who had served in the 
 or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them. As the Revolutionary War progressed, 
 aid, resources and military thinking helped shape the new army. A number of European soldiers came on their own to help, such as 
, who taught 
 tactics and organizational skills.

The Army fought numerous pitched battles, and sometimes used 
 and 
 in the South in 1780 and 1781; Under Major General 
, it hit where the British were weakest to wear down their forces. Washington led victories against the British at 
 and 
, but lost a series of battles in the 
 in 1776 and the 
 in 1777. With a decisive victory at 
 and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.

After the war, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the 
 distrust of standing armies. State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, with the exception of 
 to guard the 
 and one battery of artillery guarding 
's arsenal. However, because of continuing conflict with 
, it was soon realized that it was necessary to field a trained standing army. The 
 was at first very small and after General 
 at the Battle of the Wabash,
 where more than 800 Americans were killed, the Regular Army was reorganized as the 
, which was established in 1791 and renamed the United States Army in 1796.

In 1798, during the 
 with France, Congress established a three-year "
" of 10,000 men, consisting of twelve regiments of infantry and six troops of light dragoons. By March 1799 Congress created an "Eventual Army" of 30,000 men, including three regiments of cavalry. Both "armies" existed only on paper, but equipment for 3,000 men and horses was procured and stored.


The 
, the second and last war between the United States and Great Britain, had mixed results.  The U.S. Army did not conquer Canada but it did destroy Native American resistance to expansion in the 
 and it validated its independence by stopping two major British invasions in 1814 and 1815. After 
 in 1813, the U.S. Army seized parts of western Upper Canada, 
 and 
, which caused his 
 to collapse. Following U.S. victories in the Canadian province of Upper Canada, British troops who had dubbed the U.S. Army "Regulars, by God!", were able to capture and 
, which was defended by militia, in 1814. The regular army, however, proved they were professional and capable of defeating the British army during the 
 and 
, prompting British agreement on the previously rejected terms of a 
 antebellum. Two weeks after a treaty was signed (but not ratified), 
 defeated the British in the 
 and 
, and became a national hero. U.S. troops and sailors 
, 
 and 
 in the final engagements of the war. Per the treaty, both sides (the United States and Great Britain) returned to the geographical status quo. Both navies kept the warships they had seized during the conflict.

The army's major campaign against the Indians was fought in 
 against 
. It took long wars (1818–1858) to finally defeat the Seminoles and move them to Oklahoma. The usual strategy in Indian wars was to seize control of the Indians' winter food supply, but that was no use in Florida where there was no winter. The second strategy was to form alliances with other Indian tribes, but that too was useless because the Seminoles had destroyed all the other Indians when they entered Florida in the late eighteenth century.


The U.S. Army fought and won the 
 (1846–1848), which was a defining event for both countries.
 The U.S. victory resulted in acquisition of territory that eventually became all or parts of the states of 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and 
.

The 
 was the costliest war for the U.S. in terms of casualties. After most 
, located in the southern U.S., formed the 
, the 
, led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a large fraction of Southern white manpower. Forces of the United States (the "Union" or "the North") formed the 
, consisting of a small body of regular army units and a large body of volunteer units raised from every state, north and south, except 
.


For the first two years, Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states.
 The Confederates had the advantage of defending a large territory in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems. By 1863, the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River.  In the 
 of 1862–1863, General 
 seized the 
 and cut off the Southwest.  Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had General 
 under siege in Richmond as General 
 captured Atlanta and 
 and 
.  The Confederate capital was abandoned in April 1865 and Lee subsequently surrendered his army at Appomattox Court House. All other Confederate armies surrendered within a few months.

The war remains the deadliest conflict in U.S. history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 men on both sides. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6.4% in 
 and 18% in 
.


Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on the 
. They set up many forts, and engaged in the last of the 
. U.S. Army troops also occupied several Southern states during the 
 to protect 
.

The key battles of the 
 of 1898 were fought by the Navy. Using mostly 
, the U.S. forces defeated 
 in land campaigns in 
 and played the central role in the 
.

Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring 
.
 In 1910, during the 
, the army was deployed to U.S. towns near the border to ensure the safety of lives and property. In 1916, 
, a major rebel leader, attacked 
, prompting a 
 until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918.

The 
 as an "Associated Power" in 1917 on the side of 
, 
, 
, 
 and the other 
. U.S. troops were sent to the 
 and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war. With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.

In 1939, estimates of the Army's strength range between 174,000 and 200,000 soldiers, smaller than that of 
's, which ranked it 17th or 19th in the world in size. General 
 became Army chief of staff in September 1939 and set about expanding and modernizing the Army in preparation for war.


The United States joined 
 in December 1941 after the 
 
. Some 11 million Americans were to serve in various Army operations.
 On the 
, U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that landed in French North Africa and 
 and then 
 and later 
. In the June 1944 
 and in the subsequent 
 and defeat of 
, millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role. In 1947, the number of soldiers in the US Army had decreased from eight million in 1945 to 684,000 soldiers and the total number of active divisions had dropped from 89 to 12. The leaders of the Army saw this demobilization as a success. 

In the 
, U.S. Army soldiers participated alongside the 
 in capturing the 
 from Japanese control. Following the 
 surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after World War II, the 
 separated from the army to become the 
 in September 1947. In 1948, the army was 
 by 
 of President 
.

The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation known as the 
. With the outbreak of the 
, concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, 
 and 
, were reactivated under 
 in 1950 and U.S. strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in 
, the 
 and the 
, until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible 
 attack.


During the Cold War, U.S. troops and their allies fought 
 forces in Korea and 
. The Korean War began in June 1950, when the Soviets walked out of a UN Security Council meeting, removing their possible veto. Under a 
 umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of 
 by 
 and later to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and retreats by both sides and the Chinese 
's entry into the war, the 
 returned the peninsula to the status quo in July 1953.

The 
 is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of 
, the unpopularity of the war with the U.S. public and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by U.S. political leaders. While U.S. forces had been stationed in 
 since 1959, in intelligence and advising/training roles, they were not deployed in large numbers until 1965, after the 
. U.S. forces effectively established and maintained control of the "traditional" battlefield, but they struggled to counter the 
 hit and run tactics of the communist 
 and the 
.


During the 1960s, the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the 
 and the 
.
 In 1967, Secretary of Defense 
 decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to eight divisions (one mechanized infantry, two armored, and five infantry), but increased the number of brigades from seven to 18 (one airborne, one armored, two mechanized infantry and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not sit well with the states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base. However, no reduction in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.

The Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army General 
 in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and involved treating the three components of the army – the 
, the 
 and the 
 as a single force.
 General Abrams' intertwining of the three components of the army effectively made extended operations impossible without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and Army Reserve in a predominantly combat support role.
  The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training to specific performance standards driven by the reforms of General 
, the first commander of 
. Following the Camp David Accords that was signed by Egypt, Israel that was brokered by president 
 in 1978, as part of the agreement, both the United States and 
 agreed that there would be a joint military training led by both countries that would usually take place every 2 years, that exercise is known as 
.

The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The 
 of 1986 created 
 bringing the army together with the other four 
 under unified, geographically organized command structures. The army also played a role in the invasions of 
 in 1983 (
) and 
 in 1989 (
).

By 1989 
 and the Cold War was coming to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.
 A number of incentives such as early retirement were used.

In 1990, 
 
 its smaller neighbor, 
, and U.S. land forces quickly deployed to assure the protection of 
. In January 1991 
 commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to 
. The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the 
. Some of the largest tank battles in history were fought during the Gulf war. The 
, 
 and the 
 were tank battles of historical significance.


After Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force Policy,
 but in 2004, 
 scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential ingredient to the successful application of military force".


On 11 September 2001, 53 Army civilians (47 employees and six contractors) and 22 soldiers were among the 125 victims killed in 
 in a 
 when 
 commandeered by five 
 
 slammed into the western side of the building, as part of the 
.
 In response to the 11 September attacks and as part of the 
, U.S. and 
 forces 
 in October 2001, displacing the 
 government. The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied 
 in 2003; it served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations. In the following years, the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to 
, resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S. service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.
 23,813 insurgents were killed in Iraq between 2003 and 2011.


Until 2009, the army's chief modernization plan, its most ambitious since World War II,
 was the 
 program. In 2009, many systems were canceled, and the remaining were swept into the 
.
 By 2017, the Brigade Modernization project was completed and its headquarters, the Brigade Modernization Command, was renamed the Joint Modernization Command, or JMC.
 In response to 
, Army plans were to shrink to 1940 levels,
 although actual Active-Army end-strengths were projected to fall to some 450,000 troops by the end of FY2017.
 From 2016 to 2017, the Army retired hundreds of 
 observation helicopters,
 while retaining its Apache gunships.
 The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15 to $21 billion for FY15 expected in 2014.


By 2017, a task force was formed to address Army modernization,
 which triggered shifts of units: 
, and 
, from within 
 (AMC), and 
, respectively, to a new Army Command (ACOM) in 2018.
 The 
 (AFC), is a peer of FORSCOM, TRADOC, and AMC, the other ACOMs.
 AFC's mission is modernization reform: to design hardware, as well as to work within the acquisition process which defines materiel for AMC. TRADOC's mission is to define the architecture and organization of the Army, and to train and supply soldiers to FORSCOM.
 
 are Futures Command's vehicle for sustainable 
 for the future.
 In order to support the Army's modernization priorities, its FY2020 budget allocated $30 billion for the top six modernization priorities over the next five years.
 The $30 billion came from $8 billion in cost avoidance and $22 billion in terminations.


The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.
 In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent 
 and perform other non-wartime duties such as 
 and construction works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger 
 which were raised independently by various state governments. States also maintained full-time 
 which could also be called into the service of the army.

By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century. During World War I, the "
" was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S. Volunteers.
 It was demobilized at the end of World War I, and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps and the state militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were known as the "
" with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.


In 1941, the "
" was founded to fight World War II. The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the 
. The Army of the United States was re-established for the 
 and 
 and was demobilized upon the suspension of the 
.


Currently, the Army is divided into the 
, the Army Reserve and the 
.
  Some states further maintain 
, as a type of reserve to the National Guard, while all states maintain regulations for 
.
 State militias are both "organized", meaning that they are armed forces usually part of the state defense forces, or "unorganized" simply meaning that all able-bodied males may be eligible to be called into military service.

The U.S. Army is also divided into 
.  Branches include officers, warrant officers, and enlisted Soldiers while functional areas consist of officers who are reclassified from their former branch into a functional area. However, officers continue to wear the 
 of their former branch in most cases, as functional areas do not generally have discrete insignia. Some branches, such as 
, operate similarly to functional areas in that individuals may not join their ranks until having served in another Army branch. Careers in the Army can extend into cross-functional areas for officer,
 warrant officer, enlisted, and civilian personnel.

Before 1933, members of the Army National Guard were considered state militia until they were mobilized into the U.S. Army, typically on the onset of war. Since the 1933 amendment to the 
, all Army National Guard soldiers have held dual status. They serve as National Guardsmen under the authority of the governor of their state or territory and as reserve members of the U.S. Army under the authority of the president, in the Army National Guard of the United States.

Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the 
, peacekeeping in 
, Afghanistan, and the 
.

 
 (HQDA):

Source: U.S. Army organization


See 
 for a detailed treatment of the 
, 
, 
 and the 
 of the Army.

The U.S. Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month – known as 
 or unit training assemblies (UTAs) – and conduct two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army and the Army Reserve are organized under 
, while the National Guard is organized under 
. While the Army National Guard is organized, trained and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors. However, the District of Columbia National Guard reports to the U.S. president, not the district's mayor, even when not federalized. Any or all of the 
 can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.


The U.S. Army is led by a civilian 
, who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority, direction and control of the 
.
 The 
, who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the 
, a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the 
, the secretary of defense and the 
 on operational military matters, under the guidance of the 
 and 
.
 In 1986, the 
 mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the president to the secretary of defense directly to the 
, who have control of all armed forces units in their geographic or function area of responsibility, thus the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components. The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the secretary of defense.


By 2013, the army shifted to six geographical commands that align with the six geographical unified combatant commands (CCMD):

The army also transformed its base unit from 
 to 
. Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division. As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of brigade combat teams are:

In addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades. Combat support brigades include 
 (CAB) brigades, which will come in heavy and light varieties, 
 (artillery) brigades (now transforms to division artillery) and 
. 
 brigades include 
 brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.

The U.S. Army's conventional combat capability currently consists of 11 active divisions and one deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division) as well as several independent maneuver units. 

From 2013 through 2017, the Army sustained organizational and end-strength reductions after several years of 
. In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active brigade combat teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active-duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. Army chief of staff Raymond Odierno projected that the Army was to shrink to "450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve" by 2018.
 However, this plan was scrapped by the incoming Trump administration, with subsequent plans to expand the Army by 16,000 soldiers to a total of 476,000 by October 2017. The National Guard and the Army Reserve will see a smaller expansion.


The Army's maneuver organization was most recently altered by the reorganization of 
 into the 
, transferring the 1st and 4th Brigade Combat Teams of the 
 under a separate operational headquarters to reflect the brigades' distinct, Arctic-oriented mission. As part of the reorganization, the 1–11 (formerly 1–25) Stryker Brigade Combat Team will reorganize as an Infantry Brigade Combat Team.
 Following this transition, the active component BCTs will number 11 Armored brigades, 6 Stryker brigades, and 14 Infantry brigades.

Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve, there are a further eight divisions, 27 brigade combat teams, additional combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer and support battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.

 
 (FORSCOM)



 
 (USASOC):


The Army's Talent Management Task Force (TMTF) has deployed IPPS-A,
 the 
, an app which serves the National Guard, and in 2021 the Army Reserve and Active Army. Soldiers are reminded to update their information using the legacy systems to keep their payroll and personnel information current by December 2021. IPPS-A is the Human Resources system for the Army, is now available for download for Android, or the Apple store.
 It will be used for future promotions and other personnel decisions. Among the changes are:

Below are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently holds the rank of 
, it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.

There are several paths to becoming a 
 including the 
, 
, 
, and 
. Regardless of which road an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers and chaplains are commissioned directly into the Army.

Most army commissioned officers (those who are generalists)
 are promoted based on an "up or out" system. A more flexible talent management process is underway.
 The 
 of 1980 establishes rules for the timing of promotions and limits the number of officers that can serve at any given time.

Army regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of general as "General (last name)" regardless of the number of stars. Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as "Colonel (last name)" and first and second lieutenants as "Lieutenant (last name)".




 are single track, specialty officers with subject matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the 
, but receive their 
 upon promotion to chief warrant officer two (CW2).

By regulation, warrant officers are addressed as "Mr. (last name)" or "Ms. (last name)" by senior officers and as "sir" or "ma'am" by all enlisted personnel.
 However, many personnel address warrant officers as "Chief (last name)" within their units regardless of rank.

Sergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for 
.
 This distinguishes corporals from the more numerous specialists who have the same pay grade but do not exercise leadership responsibilities. Beginning in 2021, all corporals will be required to conduct 
 for the NCO ranks, completing the 
 (BLC), or else be laterally assigned as specialists. Specialists who have completed BLC and who have been recommended for promotion will be permitted to wear corporal rank before their recommended promotion as NCOs.


Privates and privates first class (E3) are addressed as "Private (last name)", specialists as "Specialist (last name)", corporals as "Corporal (last name)" and sergeants, staff sergeants, sergeants first class and master sergeants all as "Sergeant (last name)". First sergeants are addressed as "First Sergeant (last name)" and sergeants major and command sergeants major are addressed as "Sergeant Major (last name)".


Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories – individual and collective. Because of COVID-19 precautions, the first two weeks of 
 — not including processing and out-processing – incorporate social distancing and indoor desk-oriented training. Once the recruits have tested negative for COVID-19 for two weeks, the remaining 8 weeks follow the traditional activities for most recruits,
 followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their 
. Some individual's MOSs range anywhere from 14 to 20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length of AIT school varies by the MOS. The length of time spent in AIT depends on the MOS of the soldier. Certain highly technical MOS training requires many months (e.g., foreign language translators). Depending on the needs of the army, 
 for combat arms soldiers is conducted at a number of locations, but two of the longest-running are the Armor School and the 
, both at 
, Georgia. Sergeant Major of the Army Dailey notes that an infantrymen's pilot program for 
 (OSUT) extends 8 weeks beyond Basic Training and AIT, to 22 weeks. The pilot, designed to boost infantry readiness ended in December 2018. The new Infantry OSUT covered the 
 machine gun as well as the 
.
 The redesigned Infantry OSUT started in 2019.
 Depending on the result of the 2018 pilot, OSUTs could also extend training in other combat arms beyond the infantry.
 One Station Unit Training will be extended to 22 weeks for Armor by Fiscal Year 2021.
 Additional OSUTs are expanding to Cavalry, Engineer, and Military Police (MP) in the succeeding Fiscal Years.


A new training assignment for junior officers was instituted, that they serve as platoon leaders for Basic Combat Training (BCT) platoons.
 These lieutenants will assume many of the administrative, logistical, and day-to-day tasks formerly performed by the drill sergeants of those platoons and are expected to "lead, train, and assist with maintaining and enhancing the morale, welfare and readiness" of the drill sergeants and their BCT platoons.
 These lieutenants are also expected to stem any inappropriate behaviors they witness in their platoons, to free up the drill sergeants for training.


The 
 (ACFT) was introduced in 2018 to 60 battalions spread throughout the Army.
 The test and scoring system is the same for all soldiers, regardless of gender.  It takes an hour to complete, including resting periods.
 The ACFT supersedes the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT),
 as being more relevant to survival in combat.
 Six events were determined to better predict which muscle groups of the body were adequately conditioned for combat actions:
 three deadlifts,
 a standing power throw of a ten-pound medicine ball,
 hand-release pushups
 (which replace the traditional pushup), a sprint/drag/carry 250 yard event,
 three pull-ups with leg tucks (or a plank test in lieu of the leg tuck),
 a mandatory rest period, and a two-mile run.
 As of 1 October 2020 all soldiers from all three components (Regular Army, Reserve, and National Guard)
 are subject to this test.
 The ACFT now tests all soldiers in basic training as of October 2020. The ACFT became the official test of record 1 October 2020; before that day every Army unit was required to complete a diagnostic ACFT
 (All Soldiers with valid APFT scores can use them until March 2022. The Holistic Health and Fitness (H2F) System is one way that soldiers can prepare.).
 The ACFT movements directly translate to movements on the battlefield.


Following their basic and advanced training at the individual level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier" (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide-ranging MOS and focus it on a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, training includes pre-commissioning training, known as Basic Officer Leader Course A, either at 
 or via 
, or by completing 
. After commissioning, officers undergo branch-specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course B, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according to their future assignments. Officers will continue to attend standardized training at different stages of their careers.


Collective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the 
 (NTC) at 
, California, the 
 (JRTC) at 
, Louisiana and the 
 (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in 
,
 Germany. 
 is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2020 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment, at unit level and for other echelons as required by the mission. Individual-level replenishment still requires training at a unit level, which is conducted at the continental U.S. (CONUS) replacement center (CRC) at 
, in New Mexico and Texas before their individual deployment.


Chief of Staff Milley notes that the Army is suboptimized for training in cold-weather regions, jungles, mountains, or urban areas where in contrast the Army does well when training for deserts or rolling terrain.
 Post 9/11, Army unit-level training was for counter-insurgency (COIN); by 2014–2017, training had shifted to decisive action training.


The 
 has identified six modernization priorities, in order: artillery, ground vehicles, aircraft, network, air/missile defense, and soldier lethality.


The United States Army employs various weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges. The most common weapon type used by the army is the 
, a compact variant of the 
,
 along with the 7.62×51mm variant of the 
 for 
. The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the 9 mm 
; the 
 is also used. Both handguns are to be replaced by the 
 through the 
 program.
 Soldiers are also equipped with various 
, such as the 
 and 
.

Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the 
 (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the squad level.
 Indirect fire is provided by the 
. The 
 or the 
 are used for 
 and close-quarters combat. The 
 is used by designated marksmen. Snipers use the 
, the 
 and the 
.

The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.

The 
 is the U.S. Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.
 The 
 is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun. In the same way, the 40 mm 
 is mainly used by motorized units.


The U.S. Army uses three types of 
 for indirect fire support when heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of these is the 60 mm 
, normally assigned at the infantry company level.
 At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81 mm 
.
 The largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120 mm 
, usually employed by mechanized units.


Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105 mm 
 and the 155 mm 
.


The U.S. Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The 
 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters. The 
 is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking anti-aircraft missile. The 
 and 
 are anti-tank guided missiles.

U.S. Army doctrine puts a premium on mechanized warfare. It fields the highest vehicle-to-soldier ratio in the world as of 2009.
 The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the 
, which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform and ambulance, among many other roles.
 While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the family of 
 vehicles. The 
 is the army's 
,
 while the 
 is the standard 
.
 Other vehicles include the 
,
 the 
 and multiple types of 
 (MRAP) vehicles.

The U.S. Army's principal 
 weapons are the 
 self-propelled howitzer
 and the 
 (MLRS),
 both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.

While the 
 operates a few 
, it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the 
 
,
 the 
 utility tactical transport helicopter
 and the 
 heavy-lift transport helicopter.
 Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from 7 to 4 types.
 The Army is evaluating two fixed-wing aircraft demonstrators; ARES, and Artemis are under evaluation to replace the Guardrail ISR (Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) aircraft.
 Under the 
, the Army agreed to limit its fixed-wing aviation role to administrative mission support (light unarmed aircraft which cannot operate from forward positions). For 
, the Army is deploying at least one company of drone 
 to each Active Army division.


The 
 (ACU) currently features a camouflage pattern known as 
 (OCP); OCP replaced a pixel-based pattern known as 
 (UCP) in 2019.

On 11 November 2018, the Army announced a new version of 'Army Greens' based on uniforms worn during World War II that will become the standard garrison service uniform.
 The blue 
 will remain as the dress uniform. The Army Greens are projected to be first fielded in the summer of 2020.


The 
 of enlisted personnel displays their 
 (shown above). The U.S. Army's black beret is no longer worn with the ACU for garrison duty, having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap. After years of complaints that it was not suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General 
 eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011. Soldiers who are currently in a unit in jump status still wear berets, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified or not (maroon beret), while members of 
 (SFABs) wear brown berets. Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade (tan beret) and Special Forces (rifle green beret) may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.

The Army has relied heavily on 
 to provide the various facilities needed while on deployment (Force Provider Expeditionary (FPE)).
 The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary 
 (sleeping quarters), 
 buildings (dining facilities),
 forward operating bases (FOBs), after-action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare and recreation (MWR) facilities, as well as security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of 
.  Each FPE contains billeting, latrines, showers, laundry and kitchen facilities for 50–150 Soldiers,
 and is stored in 
.  This provisioning allows combatant commanders to position soldiers as required in their 
, within 24 to 48 hours.

The U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the 
 (DRASH). In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.





 (
; 
: 
, 
: 
), officially the 
, is a country in 
.
 It abuts the 
 and the 
 to the south, sharing borders with 
 in 
, 
 in 
, and 
 in 
.
 Ghana covers an area of 238,535 km
 (92,099 sq mi), spanning diverse biomes that range from coastal savannas to tropical rainforests. With nearly 31 million inhabitants (according to 2021 census), Ghana is the 
 in West Africa, after 
.
 The capital and 
 is 
; other major cities are 
, 
, and 
.

The first permanent state in present-day Ghana was the 
 of the 11th century.
 Numerous kingdoms and empires emerged over the centuries, of which the most powerful were the 
 in the north
 and the 
 in the south.
 Beginning in the 15th century, the 
, followed by numerous other European powers, contested the area for trading rights, until the 
 ultimately established control of the coast by the late 19th century. Following over a century of colonisation, Ghana's current borders took shape, encompassing four separate British colonial territories: 
, 
, the 
, and 
. These were unified as an independent dominion within the 
 on 6 March 1957, becoming the first colony in West Africa to achieve sovereignty.
 Ghana subsequently became influential in 
 and the 
.


Ghana is a multi-ethnic country with a diverse population, linguistic and religious groups;
 while the 
 are the largest ethnic group, they constitute only a plurality. Most 
 are 
 (71.3%); almost a fifth are 
; a tenth practise traditional faiths or report no religion.
 Ghana is a 
 
 led by a president who is both 
 and 
.
 Ghana has maintained since 1993 one of the freest and most stable governments on the continent, and it performs relatively well in healthcare, economic growth, and human development,
 so that it has a significant influence in West Africa
 and is highly integrated in international affairs, being a member of the 
, the 
, the 
, the 
, and the 
.


 means "strong warrior king" and was the title accorded to the kings of the medieval 
 in 
—not to be confused with today's Ghana, for the empire was further north, in modern-day 
, 
 and southern 
, as well as in 
.
 Ghana was known for its large gold usage and hence was named the 


Most of what is now Ghana was inhabited in the 
 and the 
 by different ethnic groups. The earliest known kingdoms to emerge in modern Ghana were the 
 states.
 The Mole-Dagomba came on horseback from present-day 
 under a single leader, 
.
 With their advanced weapons and based on a central authority, they easily invaded and occupied the lands of the local people ruled by the 
 (land god priests), established themselves as the rulers over the locals, and made 
 their capital.
 The death of Naa Gbewaa caused seccession among his children, some of whom broke off and founded separate states including 
 and 
. 
 Whiles Gbewaa was still alive, his daughter 
, travelled north and founded the 
, who constitute the majority of present day 
. Other kingdoms that emerged from 
 include the 
 of Ivory Coast, and the 
 of the 
.

Although the area of present-day Ghana has experienced many population movements, the 
-speaking peoples began to move into it toward the end of the 15th century.
 By the early 16th century, the Akans were firmly established in the Akan state called 
, for which the 
 was named.
 From the 17th century, Akans emerged from what is believed to have been the Bonoman area, to create several Akan states, mainly based on gold trading.
 These states included Bonoman (Brong-Ahafo region), Ashanti (
), 
 (
), 
 (
), and 
 
.
 By the 19th century, the territory of the southern part of Ghana was included in the 
, one of the influential states in sub-saharan Africa prior to the onset of colonialism.
 The government of the Ashanti Empire operated first as a loose network and eventually as a centralised kingdom with an advanced, highly specialised bureaucracy centred in the capital city of 
.
 Prior to Akan contact with Europeans, the Akan people created an advanced economy based on principally gold and 
 
 then traded with the states of Africa.


The Ga-Dangme and Ewe migrated westward from south-western Nigeria because of pressure from incessant tribal wars.The Ewe migrated with their other Gbe speaking kinsmen and in transition,settled in Ketou in Benin Republic, Tado in Togo and Nortsie in Togo as their final dispersal point. Their dispersal from Nortsie was necessitated by the high handed rule of King Agorkorli (Agor Akorlie). The Ga- Dangme occupy the Greater Accra Region and parts of the Eastern Region, while the Ewe are found in the 
 as well as the neighboring Togo, Benin and Nigeria ( around Badagry area).

Akan trade with European states began after contact with the 
 in the 15th century.
 Early European contact by the 
, who came to the 
 in the 15th century to trade and then established the 
 (Costa do Ouro), focused on the extensive availability of gold.
 The Portuguese built a trading lodge at a coastal settlement called Anomansah (the perpetual drink) which they renamed 
.
 In 1481, King 
 commissioned 
 to build the 
, which was completed in three years.
 By 1598, the 
 had joined the Portuguese in the gold trade, establishing the 
 (Nederlandse Bezittingen ter Kuste van Guinea) and building forts at 
 and Kormantsi.
 In 1617, the Dutch captured the Elmina Castle from the Portuguese and 
 in 1642 (
).


Other European traders had joined in gold trading by the mid-17th century, most notably the 
, establishing the 
 (Svenska Guldkusten), and 
, establishing the 
 (Danske Guldkyst 
 Dansk Guinea).
 In addition to the gold trade, European traders participated in the 
 in this area.
 More than 30 forts and castles were built by the merchants. The Germans also established the 
 
 Groß Friedrichsburg).
 In 1874, Great Britain established control over some parts of the country, assigning these areas the status of the 
.
 Many military engagements occurred between the British colonial powers and the various Akan nation-states. The Kingdom of Ashanti defeated the British a few times in the 100-year-long 
 but eventually lost with the 
 in 1900.


In 1947, the newly formed 
 led by 
 called for "self-government within the shortest possible time" following the 
.
 
, a Ghanaian nationalist who led Ghana from 1957 to 1966 as the country's first 
 and 
, formed the 
 in 1949 with the motto "self-government now".
 The party initiated a "positive action" campaign involving non-violent protests, strikes and non-cooperation with the British authorities. Nkrumah was arrested and sentenced to one year imprisonment during this time. In the Gold Coast's 
, he was elected to Parliament and released from prison to become leader of government business.
 He became the prime minister in 1952. He improved the infrastructure of the country, and his Africanisation policies created better career opportunities for Ghanaians.

On 6 March 1957 at midnight, the Gold Coast, Ashanti, the Northern Territories, and 
 were unified as one single independent dominion within the 
 under the name Ghana. This was done under the 
. The current 
, consisting of the colours red, gold, green, and a black star, dates back to this unification.
 It was designed by 
; the red represents the blood that was shed towards independence; the gold represents the 
 wealth of Ghana; the green symbolises the rich grasslands of Ghana, and the black star is the symbol of the Ghanaian people and African emancipation.


On 1 July 1960, following the 
 and 
, Nkrumah declared Ghana a republic and assumed the presidency.
 6 March is the nation's 
, and 1 July is celebrated as 
.
 At the time of independence Nkrumah declared, "My first objective is to abolish from Ghana poverty, ignorance, and disease. We shall measure our progress by the improvement in the health of our people; by the number of children in school, and by the quality of their education; by the availability of water and electricity in our towns and villages; and by the happiness which our people take in being able to manage their own affairs. The welfare of our people is our chief pride, and it is by this that my government will ask to be judged.".


Nkrumah led an 
 regime in Ghana, as he repressed political opposition and conducted elections that were not free and fair.
 In 1964, a 
 made Ghana a 
, with Nkrumah as 
 of both the nation and its party.


Nkrumah was the first African head of state to promote the concept of 
, which he had been introduced to during his studies at 
, Pennsylvania in the United States, at the time when 
 was popular for his "Back to Africa Movement".
 Nkrumah merged the teachings of Garvey, 
 and the naturalised Ghanaian scholar 
 into the formation of 1960s Ghana.
 Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, as he became known, played an instrumental part in the founding of the 
, and in establishing the 
 to teach his ideologies of 
 and 
.
 His life achievements were recognised by Ghanaians during his centenary birthday celebration, and the day was instituted as a 
 (
).


The government of Nkrumah was subsequently overthrown by a coup by the 
 codenamed "Operation Cold Chop". This occurred while Nkrumah was abroad with 
 in the People's Republic of China, on a fruitless mission to 
 in Vietnam to help end the 
. The coup took place on 24 February 1966, led by Colonel 
 and Brigadier Akwasi Afrifa. The 
 was formed, chaired by Lieutenant General 
.


A series of alternating military and civilian governments, often affected by economic instabilities,
 ruled Ghana from 1966 to 1981, ending with the ascension to power of 
 
 of the 
 in 1981.
 These changes resulted in the suspension of the 
 in 1981 and the banning of 
.
 The economy soon declined, so Rawlings negotiated a structural adjustment plan, changing many old economic policies, and economic growth recovered during the mid-1980s.
 A new constitution restoring 
 politics was promulgated in the 
; Rawlings was elected as president of Ghana then, and again in the 
.


At least 1,000 and as many as 2,000 people were killed during the 
 between the 
 and other ethnic groups such as the Nanumba, 
 and 
, while 150,000 people were displaced as part of the tribal war in 
 in 1994.


Winning the 
, 
 of the 
 was sworn into office as president of Ghana on 7 January 2001 and attained the presidency again in the 
, thus also serving two terms (the term limit) as president of Ghana and thus marking the first time under the fourth republic that power was transferred from one legitimately elected head of state and head of government to another.


Nana Akufo-Addo, the ruling party candidate, was defeated in a very close election by 
 of the 
 following the 
.
 Mills died of natural causes and was succeeded by Vice President 
 on 24 July 2012.
 Following the 
, Mahama became president, 
 and Ghana was a stable democracy.
 As a result of the 
,
 
 became president on 7 January 2017.
 He was re-elected after a tightly contested 
.


On 11 June 2021, Ghana inaugurated Green Ghana Day in an aim of planting 5 million trees in a concentrating effort to preserve the country's cover of rainforest to combat deforestation.


Ghana is located on the 
, only a few degrees north of the 
, therefore giving it a warm climate.
 Ghana spans an area of 238,535 km
 (92,099 sq mi) and has an Atlantic coastline that stretches 560 kilometres (350 miles) on the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean to its south.
 
 and 
 are near the south coast.
 It lies between latitudes 4°45'N and 11°N, and longitudes 1°15'E and 3°15'W. The 
 passes through Ghana, specifically through 
.
 Ghana is geographically closer to the "centre" of the Earth than any other country, since the notional centre, (0°, 0°) is located in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 614 km (382 mi) off the south-east coast of Ghana.

Grasslands mixed with south coastal shrublands and forests dominate Ghana, with forest extending northward from the coast 320 kilometres (200 miles) and eastward for a maximum of about 270 kilometres (170 miles) with several locations for mining of industrial minerals and timber.
 Ghana is home to five terrestrial ecoregions: 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 It had a 2018 
 mean score of 4.53/10, ranking it 112th globally out of 172 countries.



The 
 River and its tributary 
, flow south through Ghana to 
, the world's 
 and largest by surface area, formed by the hydroelectric 
,
 completed in 1965. The Volta flows out of Lake Volta into the Gulf of Guinea.
 The northernmost part of Ghana is Pulmakong and the southernmost part of Ghana is 
.
Volta Region: Longest mountain range in Ghana-Akwapim Togo ranges 

Mt Afadja- highest mountain in Ghana 

Wli waterfall- the highest waterfall in Ghana 

Amedzofe- Mt Gemi- waterfall and canopy walk.

Golden sandy beaches stretching from Anyanui to Aflao 

Aflao: the eastern gateway to Ghana and bordering Lome, the Togolese capital 

Keta- Fort Prizenstein, the former Danish slave trading post. Site of proposed Keta Port. The town with the most promising and expanding tourism potential in Ghana 

The 
 is 
, and there are two main seasons: the 
 and the 
.
 Ghana sits at the intersection of three hydro-climatic zones.
 Changes in rainfall, weather conditions and sea-level rise affect the salinity of coastal waters. This is expected to negatively affect both farming and fisheries.
 The national economy stands to suffer from the impacts of climate change because of its dependence on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, energy, and forestry. Moreover, access to fresh water is expected to become more challenging, and reduced water supply will have a negative impact on hydropower, which provides 54% of the country's electricity capacity. Additionally, Ghana will probably see more cases of 
 and 
, since both are impacted by changes in water conditions.

In 2015, the government produced a document titled "Ghana's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution."
 Following that, Ghana signed the Paris Climate Agreement in 2016.

Ghana is a 
 
 
 with a parliamentary 
 that is dominated by two parties—the National Democratic Congress (NDC) and the New Patriotic Party (NPP). Ghana alternated between civilian and military governments until January 1993, when the military government gave way to the Fourth Republic of Ghana after 
 and 
 in late 1992. The 1992 
 divides powers among a 
 of the 
 (
), parliament (
), cabinet (
), council of state (
), and an independent judiciary (
). The government is elected by 
 after every four years.


 won the presidency in the 
, defeating incumbent 
. He also won the 
 after the presidential election results were challenged at the Supreme Court by flagbearer of the NDC, John Mahama. Presidents are limited to two four-year terms in office. The president can serve a second term only upon re-election.

The 2012 
 indicated that Ghana is ranked the 67th-least fragile state in the world and the fifth-least fragile state in Africa. Ghana ranked 112th out of 177 countries on the index.
 Ghana ranked as the 64th-least corrupt and politically corrupt country in the world out of all 174 countries ranked and ranked as the fifth-least corrupt and politically corrupt country in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 
.
 Ghana was ranked 7th in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 
. The Ibrahim Index is a comprehensive measure of African government, based on variables which reflect the success with which governments deliver essential political goods to its citizens.


Since independence, Ghana has been devoted to ideals of nonalignment and is a founding member of the 
. Ghana favours international and regional political and economic co-operation, and is an active member of the United Nations and the African Union.


Ghana has a strong relationship with the United States. Three recent U.S. presidents—
, 
, and 
—made diplomatic trips to Ghana. Many Ghanaian diplomats and politicians hold positions in international organisations, including Ghanaian diplomat and former 
 
, 
 Judge 
, as well as former President 
 and former President 
, who both served as diplomats of the United Nations.


In September 2010, President 
 visited China on an official visit. Mills and China's former President 
 marked the 50th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two nations, at the 
.
 China reciprocated with an official visit in November 2011, by the vice-chairman of the 
, 
 who visited Ghana and met with Ghana's President 
.
 Iranian President 
 met with Mahama in 2013 to hold discussions on strengthening the 
 and also co–chair a bilateral meeting between Ghana and Iran at the Ghanaian 
 
.


The 
 were integrated into Ghana's development agenda and the budget. According to reports, the SDGs were implemented through a decentralized planning approach. This allows stakeholders' participations such as UN agencies, traditional leaders, civil society organizations, academia, and others.
 The 17 SDGs are a global call to action to end poverty among others, and the UN and its partners in the country are working towards achieving them.
 According to the President 
, Ghana was "the first sub-Saharan African country to achieve the goal of halving poverty, as contained in Goal 1 of the 
"


In 1957, the 
 (GAF) consisted of its headquarters, support services, three battalions of infantry and a reconnaissance squadron with armoured vehicles.
 President Nkrumah aimed at rapidly expanding the GAF to support the 
 ambitions. Thus, in 1961, 4th and 5th Battalions were established, and in 1964 6th Battalion was established, from a 
 
 originally raised in 1963.
 Today, Ghana is a 
 and 
.
 In his book 
, 
 commander 
 highly rated the GAF soldiers and military personnel.


The 
 and 
 of the GAF are conceptualised in the constitution, Ghana's Law on Armed Force Military Strategy, and 
 agreements to which GAF is attestator.
 GAF military operations are executed under the auspices and imperium of the 
.
 Although Ghana is relatively peaceful and is often considered being one of the least violent countries in the region, Ghana has experienced political violence in the past and 2017 has thus far seen an upward trend in incidents motivated by political grievances.


The 
 and the 
 are the main law enforcement agencies, responsible for the detection of crime, maintenance of law and order and the maintenance of internal peace and security.
 The Ghana Police Service has eleven specialised police units, including a 
 
 and 
.
 The Ghana Police Service operates in 12 divisions: ten covering the regions of Ghana, one assigned specifically to the seaport and industrial hub of 
, and the twelfth being the Railways, Ports and Harbours Division.
 The Ghana Police Service's Marine Police Unit and Division handles issues that arise from the country's offshore 
.



The 
 and the sub-division 
 administers incarceration.
 Ghana retains and exercises the death penalty for treason, corruption, robbery, piracy, drug trafficking, rape, and homicide.
 The new sustainable development goals adopted by the United Nations call for the international community to come together to promote the rule of law; support equal access to justice for all; reduce corruption; and develop effective, accountable, and transparent institutions at all levels.
Ghana is used as a key narcotics industry transshipment point by traffickers, usually from South America as well as some from other African nations.
 In 2013, the UN chief of the Office on Drugs and Crime stated that "West Africa is completely weak in terms of border control and the big drug cartels from 
 and 
 have chosen Africa as a way to reach Europe."
 There is not a wide or popular knowledge about the narcotics industry and intercepted narcotics within Ghana, since it is an 
. The social context within which narcotic trafficking, storage, transportation, and repacking systems exist in Ghana and the state's location along the Gulf of Guinea makes Ghana an attractive country for the narcotics business.
 The 
 has impounded container ships at the Sekondi Naval Base in the 
. These ships were carrying thousands of kilograms of cocaine, with a street value running into billions of 
. However, drug seizures saw a decline in 2011.
 
 are using new methods in narcotics production and narcotics exportation, to avoid Ghanaian security agencies.
 Underdeveloped institutions, porous open borders, and the existence of established smuggling organisations contribute to Ghana's position in the narcotics industry.
 President Mills initiated ongoing efforts to reduce the role of airports in Ghana's drug trade.


 are prohibited by law in Ghana.
 According to a 2013 survey by the 
, 96% of Ghanaians believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society.
 Sometimes elderly 
 are accused of 
, particularly in rural Ghana. Issues of witchcraft mainly remain as speculations based on superstitions within families. In some parts of northern Ghana, there exist what are called 
. This is said to house a total of around 1,000 people accused of witchcraft.
 The Ghanaian government has announced that it intends to close the camps.


Ghana is divided into 16 
 regions, sub-divided into 275 districts:


Ghana is an average 
 enriched country possessing 
, 
 and 
. It is an emerging designated 
 with 
 hybridisation and an 
. It has an economic plan target known as the "Ghana Vision 2020". This plan envisions Ghana as the first African country to become a 
 between 2020 and 2029 and a 
 between 2030 and 2039.
 This excludes fellow 
 member and 
 country South Africa, which is a newly industrialised country.


Ghana's economy has ties to the 
 along with Ghana's vast gold reserves. In 2013, the 
 began circulating the renminbi throughout Ghanaian state-owned banks and to the Ghana public as 
 along with the national 
 for second national trade currency.


Between 2012 and 2013, 38% of rural dwellers were experiencing poverty whereas only 11% of urban dwellers were.
 Urban areas hold greater opportunity for employment, particularly in informal trade, while nearly all (94 percent) of rural poor households participate in the agricultural sector.


The 
 and the 
, both state-owned, are the two major electricity producers.
 The 
, built on the Volta River in 1965, along with the 
, the 
 and several other hydroelectric dams, provide 
.
 In addition, the government sought to 
.

The 
 is the 5th largest on continental Africa and 3rd largest in sub-saharan Africa with a 
 of 
 57.2 billion or 
180.4 billion in 2012 with the South Africa 
 as first.
 The 
 was the 2nd best performing 
 in sub-saharan Africa in 2013.


Ghana produces high-quality 
.
 It is the 2nd largest producer of cocoa globally.
 Ghana is classified as a middle income country.
 
 account for 50% of GDP, followed by 
 (24.1%), 
 (5%), and taxes (20.9%).
 Ghana has an increasing primary manufacturing economy and export of digital technology goods along with assembling and exporting automobiles and ships, diverse resource rich exportation of 
, agricultural products primarily cocoa, petroleum and natural gas,
 and 
 such as 
 primarily via Ghana's state digital technology corporation 
 which manufactures 
 with 
 and various 
.
 
 
 have been manufactured in Ghana since 2014.


Ghana announced plans to issue government debt by way of social and green bonds in Autumn 2021, making it the first African country to do so.
 The country, which is planning to borrow up to $5 billion in international markets this year, would use the proceeds from these sustainable bonds to refinance debt used for social and environmental projects and pay for educational or health. Only a few other nations have sold them so far, including 
 and 
. The country will use the proceeds to forge ahead with a free secondary-school initiative started in 2017 among other programs, despite having recorded its lowest economic growth rate in 37 years in 2020.


Ghana produces and exports an abundance of 
 such as 
 and 
.
 The 100%-state-owned 
 company of Ghana, 
, is the number 1 petroleum and gas filling station of Ghana, and the 100%-state-owned state oil company 
 oversees 
 and production of Ghana's entire petroleum and natural gas reserves. Ghana aims to further increase the output of oil to 2.2 million barrels (350,000 m
) per day and gas to 34,000,000 cubic metres (1.2
 cu ft) per day.


The 
, which contains up to 3 billion barrels (480,000,000 m
) of sweet crude oil, was discovered in 2007.
 Ghana is believed to have up to 5 billion barrels (790,000,000 m
) to 7 billion barrels (1.1
10
 m
) of petroleum in reserves,
 which is the fifth-largest in Africa and the 21st-to-25th-
 in the world. It also has up to 1.7
10
 cubic metres (6
 cu ft) of natural gas in reserves,
 which is the sixth-largest in Africa and the 49th-
 in the world. 
 off Ghana's eastern coast on the Gulf of Guinea is ongoing, and the amount of both crude oil and natural gas continues to increase. The government has drawn up plans to 
 Ghana's entire petroleum and natural gas reserves to increase government revenue.


As of 2019, Ghana was the 7th largest producer of gold in the world, producing ~140 
 that year.
 This record saw Ghana surpass South Africa in output for the first time, making Ghana the largest gold producer in Africa.
 In addition to gold, Ghana also exports 
, timber, 
, 
, and 
, and has numerous other not-yet-fully 
 mineral deposits.
 Ghana ranks 9th in the world in both diamond export and reserve size.
 The government has drawn up plans to 
 Ghana's mining industry to increase government revenue.


Severe shortages of electricity in 2015 & 2016 led to 
 (persistent, irregular and unpredictable electric power outages),
 increasing the interest in renewables.
 As of 2019, there is now a surplus of electricity which now presents a new set of financial challenges.


The 
 deals with corruption, economic malpractice and lack of economic transparency.
 Despite significant economic progress, obstacles do remain. Particular institutions need reform, and 
 need improvement. The overall 
 regime lacks 
. Tackling these issues will be necessary if Ghana's rapid economic growth is to be maintained.
 According to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index of 2018, out of 180 countries, Ghana was ranked 78th, with a score of 41 on a scale where a 0–9 score means highly corrupt, and a 90–100 score means very clean. This was based on perceived levels of public sector corruption.


Ghana was the first sub-Saharan African country to launch a cellular mobile network (1992). It was one of the first countries in Africa to be connected to the internet and to introduce ADSL broadband services.
 Ghana was ranked 112nd in the 
 in 2021, down from 106th in 2019.


The 
 (GSSTC) and Ghana Space Agency (GhsA) oversee the 
 and space programmes of Ghana. GSSTC and GhsA worked to have a 
 
 launched into orbit in 2015.
 Ghana's annual space exploration expenditure has been 1% of its GDP, to support research in science and technology. In 2012, Ghana was elected to chair the 
 (Comsats); Ghana has a joint effort in space exploration with the 
.


In 2011, 1,087,000 tourists visited Ghana.
 Tourist arrivals include South Americans, Asians, Europeans, and North Americans.
 The attractions and major tourist destinations include a warm, tropical climate year-round, diverse wildlife, waterfalls such as 
 and the largest waterfall in west Africa, 
, the coastal palm-lined sandy beaches, caves, mountains, rivers, and reservoirs and lakes such as 
 and the largest man-made lake in the world by surface area, 
, dozens of 
, 
, nature reserves and national parks.
 In addition to the beautiful natural reserves which serve as tourist sites, there are some castles that attract many tourists from all over the world. Some of the notable castles are 
 and the 
.
 Not only are the castles important for tourism, they also mark where blood was shed in the slave trade and preserve and promote the African heritage stolen and destroyed through the slave trade.
 As a result of this, the 
 of UNESCO named Ghana's castles and forts as World Heritage Monuments.


The 
 statistics in 2010 showed that out of the world's favourite tourist destinations, Ghana was ranked 108th out of 139 countries.
 The country had moved two places up from the 2009 rankings. In 2011, 
 magazine published that Ghana was ranked the eleventh most friendly country in the world. The assertion was based on a survey in 2010 of a cross-section of travellers. Of all the African countries that were included in the survey, Ghana ranked highest.
 Tourism is the fourth highest earner of foreign exchange for the country.
 In 2017, Ghana ranked as the 
 in the world.


A growing tourist attraction is 
. Up and down the coastline, several spots have been identified and cultivated by locals and internationals alike. Renowned surfers have made trips to the country to sample the waves. Suitable for beginners and seasoned surfers alike, there is a quality and consistency to the waves to suit all levels of skill. It is not unusual now to see surfers carrying their boards amid traditional Ghanaian 
. 
, 
, and Muuston boast some of the country's best surf in warm, tropical waters.


According to Destination Pride
–a data-driven search platform used to visualize the world's LGBTQ+ laws, rights and social sentiment–Ghana's Pride score is 22 (out of 100).


Ghana's education system is divided into three parts: basic education, secondary cycle, and tertiary education. "Basic education" lasts 11 years (ages 4‒15).
 It is divided into kindergarten (2 years), primary school (2 modules of 3 years) and junior high (3 years). Junior high school ends with the 
.
 Once certified, the pupil can proceed to the secondary cycle.
 Hence, the pupil has the choice between general education (offered by the senior high school) and vocational education (offered by the technical senior high school or the technical and vocational institutes). Senior high school lasts three years and leads to the 
, which is a prerequisite for enrollment in a university bachelor's degree programme.
 Polytechnics are open to vocational students.


A bachelor's degree usually requires four years of study. It can be followed by a one- or two-year master's degree programme, which can be followed by a PhD programme of at least three years.
 A polytechnic programme lasts two or three years.
 Ghana possesses numerous colleges of education.
 Some of the notable universities, the 
, 
, and 
, to mention a few.
 

With over 95% of its children in school, Ghana currently has one of the highest school enrollment rates in all of Africa.
 The female and male ages 15–24 years literacy rate in Ghana was 81% in 2010, with males at 82%,
 and females at 80%.
 Ghana's education system annually attracts many 
 particularly in the university sector.


Ghana has a 
 6-year primary school education system beginning at age six.
 The government largely funds basic education comprising public primary schools and public junior high schools. Senior high schools were subsidised by the government until September 2017/2018 academic year that senior high education became free.
 At the higher education level, the government funds more than 80% of resources provided to public universities, polytechnics and teacher training colleges. As part of the Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education, Fcube, the government supplies all basic education schools with all their textbooks and other educational supplies, like exercise books. Senior high schools are also provided with all their textbook requirements by the government. Private schools acquire their educational material from private suppliers.


As of 2019, Ghana has a population of 30,083,000.
 Around 29% of the population is under the age of 15, while persons aged 15–64 make up 57.8 percent of the population.
 The 2010 census reported that the largest ethnic groups are the Akan (47.3%), the Mole-Dagbani (16.6%), the Ewe (13.9%), the Ga-Dangme (7.4%), the Gurma (5.7%) and the Guan (3.7%).
 
The median age of Ghanaian citizens is 30 years old and the average household size is 3.6 persons.


With 
 of 
 who possess 
, there is a small population of Chinese, Malaysian, Indian, Middle Eastern and European nationals. In 2010, the 
 reported many 
 and 
: 14.6% (or 3.1 million) of Ghana's 2010 population (predominantly Nigerians, Burkinabe citizens, Togolese citizens, and Malian citizens). In 1969, under the "Ghana Aliens Compliance Order" enacted by the Prime Minister Kofi Abrefa Busia;
 The 
 deported over 3,000,000 aliens and illegal immigrants in three months as they made up 20% of the population at the time.
In 2013, there was a mass deportation of illegal miners, more than 4,000 of them Chinese nationals.
English is the 
 of Ghana.
 Additionally, there are eleven languages that have the status of government-sponsored languages:

Of these, Asante Twi is the most widely spoken.


Because Ghana is surrounded by 
, French is widely taught in schools and used for commercial and international economic exchanges. Since 2006, Ghana has been an associate member of the 
,
 the global organisation that unites French-speaking countries (84 nations on six continents). In 2005, more than 350,000 Ghanaian children studied French in schools. Since then, its status has been progressively updated to a mandatory language in every junior high school,
 and it is in the process of becoming an official language.


, also known as Kru English (or in Akan, 
), is a variety of 
 spoken mainly in Accra and in the southern towns.
 It can be divided into two varieties, referred to as "uneducated" or "non-institutionalized" pidgin and "educated" or "institutionalized" pidgin, the former associated with uneducated or illiterate people and the latter acquired and used in institutions such as universities.


In 2010, the population was 72.2% Christian (24.3% 
, 18.4% 
, 13.1% 
 and 11.4% other). Approximately 18.6% of the population of Ghana are Muslim,
 (51% 
, 16% 
, and 8% 
).
 Hinduism in Ghana was popularized by Swami Ghana Nanda ji, who opened several temples in the nation.
 The temple of Lord Shiva in Accra is one of the largest where there are celebrations to Ganesh Chaturthi, Rath Yatra, and other Hindu observations.
 The 
 religious community, established in Ghana in 1951, today includes more than 100 communities and over 50 local Bahá’í administrative councils, called Local Spiritual Assemblies.


Ghana has a 
 system strictly designated for 
, 
 (NHIS).
 Health care is variable throughout Ghana and in 2012, over 12 million Ghanaian nationals were covered by the NHIS.
 Urban centres are well served and contain most of the hospitals, clinics, and pharmacies. There are over 200 hospitals, and Ghana is a destination for 
.
 In 2010, there were 0.1 physicians per 1,000 people and as of 2011
, 0.9 hospital beds per 1,000 people.
 5.2% of Ghana's GDP was spent on health in 2010.
 In 2020, the WHO announced Ghana became the second country in the WHO African Region to attain regulatory system "maturity level 3", the second-highest in the four-tiered WHO classification of 
.


Life expectancy at birth in 2020 was 71 for a female and 65 for a male.
 In 2013, 
 was to 39 per 1,000 live births.
 Sources vary on life expectancy at birth; the 
 (WHO) estimated 62 years for men and 64 years for women born in 2016.
 The fertility rate declined from 3.99 (2000) to 3.28 (2010) with 2.78 in urban region and 3.94 in rural region.
 The United Nations reports a fertility decline from 6.95 (1970) to 4.82 (2000) to 3.93 live births per woman in 2017.


As of 2012
, the 
 prevalence was estimated at 1.40% among adults aged 15–49.


 includes an assortment of soups and stews with varied seafoods; most Ghanaian soups are prepared with vegetables, meat, poultry or fish.
 Fish is important in the diet with tilapia, roasted and fried 
, smoked fish and crayfish, all being common components of Ghanaian dishes.
 
 (akple) is a common starchy food made from ground corn (maize),
 and cornmeal based staples kɔmi (
) and banku (akple) are usually accompanied by some form of fried fish (chinam) or grilled tilapia and a very spicy condiment made from raw red and green chillies, onions and tomatoes (pepper sauce).
 Banku and tilapia is a combo served in most restaurants.
 
 is the most common exported Ghanaian dish and is a delicacy across the 
.
 Rice is an established staple meal across the country, with various rice based dishes serving as breakfast, lunch and dinner, the main variants are waakye, plain rice and stew (eight kontomire or tomato gravy), fried rice and 
.


 is literature produced by authors from Ghana or in the 
. The tradition of literature starts with a long oral tradition, was influence heavily by western literature during colonial rule, and became prominent with a post-colonial nationalist tradition in the mid 20th century.
 The current literary community continues with a diverse network of voices both within and outside the country today, including film, theatre, and modern digital formats such as blogging.


The most prominent authors are novelists 
, 
 and 
, who gained international acclaim with the books 
 (1911), 
 (1968) and 
 (2009), respectively.
 In addition to novels, other literature arts such as theatre and poetry have also had a very good development and support at the national level with prominent playwrights and poets 
 and 
.
 


During the 13th century, Ghanaians developed their unique art of 
 printing. Hand-printed and hand-embroidered adinkra clothes were made and used exclusively by royalty for devotional ceremonies. Each of the motifs that make up the 
 of adinkra symbolism has a name and meaning derived from a proverb, a historical event, human attitude, 
, 
, or shapes of inanimate and man-made objects. The meanings of the motifs may be categorised into aesthetics, ethics, human relations, and concepts.
 The Adinkra symbols have a decorative function as tattoos but also represent objects that encapsulate evocative messages that convey traditional wisdom, aspects of life, or the environment. There are many symbols with distinct meanings, often linked with proverbs. In the words of 
, they were one of the means in a pre-literate society for "supporting the transmission of a complex and nuanced body of practice and belief".
Along with the 
 Ghanaians use many cloth fabrics for their traditional attire.
 The different ethnic groups have their own individual cloth. The most well known is the 
.
 Kente is a very important national costume and clothing, and these clothes are used to make traditional and modern Kente attire.
 Different symbols and different colours mean different things.
 
 is the most famous of all the Ghanaian clothes.
 Kente is a ceremonial cloth hand-woven on a horizontal 
 and strips measuring about 4 inches wide are sewn together into larger pieces of cloths.
 Cloths come in various colours, sizes and designs and are worn during very important social and religious occasions.
 In a cultural context, kente is more important than just a cloth as it is a visual representation of history and also a form of written language through weaving.
 The term kente has its roots in the Akan word 
 which means a basket and the first kente weavers used raffia fibres to weave cloths that looked like kenten (a basket); and thus were referred to as 
; meaning basket cloth.
 The original Akan name of the cloth was 
 or 
, meaning "a cloth hand-woven on a loom"; however, "kente" is the most frequently used term today.
Kente is also woven by the Ewe people (Ewe Kente) in the Volta Region. The main weaving centers are Agortime area and Agbozume. Agbozume has a vibrant kente market attracting patrons from all over west Africa and the diaspora.


Contemporary Ghanaian fashion includes traditional and modern styles and fabrics and has made its way into the African and global fashion scene. The cloth known as 
 was created out of Dutch wax textiles. It is believed that in the late 19th century, Dutch ships on their way to Asia stocked with machine-made textiles that mimicked Indonesian 
 stopped at many West African ports on the way. The fabrics did not do well in Asia. However, in West Africa—mainly Ghana where there was an already established market for cloths and textiles—the client base grew and it was changed to include local and traditional designs, colours and patterns to cater to the taste of the new consumers.
 Today outside of Africa it is called "Ankara," and it has a client base well beyond Ghana and Africa as a whole. It is popular among Caribbean peoples and African Americans; celebrities such as 
 and her sister 
 have been seen wearing African print attire.
 Many designers from countries in North America and Europe are now using African prints, and they have gained a global interest.
 British luxury fashion house 
 created a collection around Ghanaian styles.
 American musician 
 has repeatedly incorporated African prints into her clothing line and can often be seen wearing it.
 Internationally acclaimed Ghanaian-British designer 
 introduced African print suits in his 2012 collection.


The 
 is diverse and varies between different ethnic groups and regions. Ghanaian music incorporates several distinct types of musical instruments such as the talking drum ensembles, 
, 
 fiddle and koloko lute, court music, including the Akan 
, the Akan atumpan, the Ga kpanlogo styles, and log 
 used in asonko music.
 The most well-known genres to have come from Ghana are African jazz, which was created by 
,
 and its earliest form of secular music, called 
.
 Highlife originated in the late 19th century and early 20th century and spread throughout West Africa.
 

In the 1990s, a new genre of music was created by the youth incorporating the influences of highlife, Afro-reggae, 
 and 
.
 This hybrid was called 
.
 Ghanaian artists such as "Afro Roots" singer, activist and songwriter 
, R&B and soul singer 
 and 
 have had international success.
 In 2015, Rocky Dawuni became the first Ghanaian musician to be nominated for a Grammy award in the 
 category for his sixth studio album, titled 


Ghanaian dance is as diverse as its music, and there are traditional dances and different dances for different occasions.
 The most known dances are those for celebrations. These dances include the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and 
.
 The Nana Otafrija Pallbearing Services, also known as the 
, come from the coastal town of 
. The group was featured in a BBC feature story in 2017, and footage from the story became part of an Internet meme in the wake of the 
.


Ghana has a budding and thriving film industry. 
 dates as far back as 1948 when the Gold Coast Film Unit was set up in the Information Services Department.
 Some internationally recognised films have come from Ghana. In 1970, 
 was one of the first Ghanaian films to receive international acknowledgement and received great reviews from 
.
 It was followed by the 1973 Ghanaian and Italian production 
 also known as "
" featuring Bahamian American actor 
.
 1983's 
, a Ghanaian and German production directed by King Ampaw, was written about by famous American film critic 
.
 In 1987, 
, another Ghanaian and German production directed by 
, received international acclamation and in 1988, 
 won more than 12 film awards.

In recent times, there have been collaborations between Ghanaian and Nigerian crew and cast and a number of productions turned out. Many Ghanaian films are co-produced with 
, the Nigerian film industry, and some are distributed by Nigerian marketers. Also, Nigerian filmmakers often feature Ghanaian actors and actresses in their movies, and Ghanaian filmmakers feature Nigerian actors and actresses in theirs. 
, 
, 
 and 
, all popular Ghanaian actresses, and 
 and 
 are popular Ghanaian actors, have starred in many Nigerian movies. As a result of these collaborations, Western viewers often confuse Ghanaian movies with Nollywood and count their sales as one; however, they are two independent industries that sometimes share 
. In 2009, UNESCO described Nollywood as the second-biggest film industry in the world after 
.
 Though The film industry had a downtrend for almost a decade mainly because of low input in production this scenario has drastically changed. New and emerging young film makers are adding spice to the already rich Ghana movie scene. Bliz Bazawule,
 Peter Sedufia,
 Joseph Clef
 and many others have shown the world the new age of filming in Ghana.

The 
 are amongst the most free in Africa. Chapter 12 of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana guarantees 
 and independence of the media, while Chapter 2 prohibits censorship.
 Post-independence, the government and media often had a tense relationship, with private outlets closed during the military governments and strict media laws that prevented criticism of government.
 Press freedoms were restored in 1992, and after the election in 2000 of Kufuor, the tensions between the private media and government decreased. Kufuor supported press freedom and repealed a 
 law, but maintained that the media had to act responsibly.
 The Ghanaian media have been described as "one of the most unfettered" in Africa, operating with little restriction. The private press often carries criticism of government policy.


 is the top spectator sport in Ghana, and the 
 is known as the Black Stars, with the 
 known as the Black Satellites.
 Ghana has won the 
 four times, the 
 once, and has participated in three consecutive 
 in 2006, 2010, and 2014.
 In the 
, Ghana became the third African country to reach the quarter-final stage after Cameroon in 1990 and Senegal in 2002.
 Ghana is the first and only country on the Africa continent to be crowned FIFA U-20 World Cup Champions,
 and two-time runners up in 
 and 
. The Ghana national U-17 football team known as the Black Starlets are two-time 
 champions in 
 and 
, two-time runners up in 
 and 
.


Ghanaian 
 
 and 
 are the 5th and 9th best football teams on the Africa continent and have won a total of five Africa continental association football and 
 trophies; Asante Kotoko SC has been crowned two-time 
 winners in 
, 
 and five-time CAF Champions League runners up. Accra Hearts of Oak SC has been crowned 
 winner and two-time CAF Champions League runners up, 2001 
 champions and 
 champions.
 The 
 crowned Asante Kotoko SC as the 
.
 There are several club football teams that play in the 
 and 
, both administered by the 
.


Ghana competed in the Winter Olympics in 2010 for the first time. Ghana qualified for the 2010 Winter Olympics, scoring 137.5 
 points, within the qualifying range of 120–140 points.
 Skier 
 became the first Ghanaian to take part in the Winter Olympics, taking part in the 
.
 Ghana finished 47th out of 102 participating nations, of whom 54 finished in the 
.
 Ghana's last medal at the 
 dates back to 1992.
 Ghanaian athletes have won a total of four medals in thirteen appearances at the Summer Olympics, three in boxing, and a bronze medal in association football, and thus became the first country on the Africa continent to win a medal at association football.


Ghana competes in the 
, sending athletes in every edition since 
 (except for the 
). Ghana has won 57 medals at the Commonwealth Games, including 15 gold, with all but one of their medals coming in athletics and boxing. The country has also produced a number of world class boxers, including 
 a three-time world champion and considered as Africa's greatest boxer,
 
 also a three-time world champion,
 
,
 and 
.



Ghana's women's football team won a bronze at the 
 2016 edition in Yaoundé, Cameroon. The team beat South Africa 1–0.
 Ghana featured a men's national team in 
 that competed at the 
.
 Ghana is to host the 
 in Accra.
There are two types of Ghanaian traditional construction: the series of adjacent buildings in an enclosure around a common, and the traditional round huts with grass roof.
 The round huts with grass roof architecture are situated in the northern regions, while the series of adjacent buildings are in the southern regions. Ghanaian 
 and 
 buildings are predominant in the southern regions, while heritage sites are most evident in the more than thirty forts and castles in the country, such as 
 and 
. Ghana has museums that are situated inside castles, and two are situated inside a fort.
 The 
 and the 
 organise temporary exhibitions.


Ghana has museums that show an in-depth look at specific regions. There are a number of museums that provide insight into the traditions and history of the geographical areas.
 The 
 Museum and St. Georges Castle (
) Museum offer guided tours. The 
 provides its visitors with a look into the domain of Ghanaian scientific development, through exhibits of objects of scientific and technological interest.


The 
 depicts two animals: the 
 and the lion; a ceremonial sword; a heraldic castle on a heraldic sea; a 
 and a mine shaft representing the industrial mineral wealth of Ghana; and a five-pointed black star rimmed with gold, representing the mineral gold wealth of Ghana and the lodestar of the Ghanaian people.
 It also has the legend 
.



The 
 consists of three horizontal bands (strips) of red (top), gold (middle) and green (bottom); the three bands are the same height and width; the middle band bears a five-pointed black 
 in the centre of the gold band, the colour red band stands for the blood spilled to achieve the nation's independence: gold stands for Ghana's industrial mineral wealth, and the colour green symbolises the rich tropical rainforests and natural resources of Ghana.
279 Felix Kuadugah- contributor- Ewe migration






				Pages for logged out editors 

			


 (
 
) is a 
 on the northwest extremity of North America. A 
 of the U.S., it borders 
 and the 
 in Canada to the east, and shares a western maritime border in the 
 with the Russian Federation's 
. To the north are the 
 and 
 Seas of the Arctic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean lies to the south and southwest.

Alaska is the 
 by area, comprising more total area than the next three largest states of 
, 
, and 
 combined, and is the 
. It is the 
 and 
 U.S. state, and the continent's most populous territory located mostly north of the 
, with a population of 736,081 as of 2020—more than quadruple the combined populations of 
 and Greenland.
  The state capital of 
 is the second-
, and the former capital of Alaska, 
, is the largest U.S. city by area.  Approximately half of Alaska's residents live within the 
. 

 have lived in Alaska for thousands of years, and it is widely believed that the region served as 
 of North America by way of the 
. The 
 was the first to actively 
 the area beginning in the 18th century, eventually establishing 
, which spanned most of the current state. The expense and logistical difficulty of maintaining this distant possession prompted 
 in 1867 for 
7.2 million (equivalent to $140 million in 2021). The area went through several administrative changes before becoming organized as a 
 on May 11, 1912. It was admitted as the 49th state of the U.S. on January 3, 1959.


Abundant natural resources have enabled Alaska—with one of the smallest state economies—to have one of the highest 
, with 
, and the extraction of 
 and oil, dominating 
. U.S. Armed Forces bases and 
 also contribute to the economy; more than half the state is federally-owned land containing 
, 
, and 
.

The Indigenous population of Alaska is proportionally the highest of any U.S. state, at over 15 percent.
 Various Indigenous languages are spoken, and Alaskan Natives are influential in local and state politics.

The name "Alaska" (Russian: 
, 
 
) was introduced in the 
 when it was used to refer to the 
. It was derived from an 
 
, 
, meaning "the mainland" or, more literally, "the object towards which the action of the sea is directed".
 It is also known as 
, the "great land", an 
 word that was derived from the same root.

Numerous indigenous peoples occupied Alaska for thousands of years before the arrival of European peoples to the area. Linguistic and DNA studies done here have provided evidence for the settlement of North America by way of the 
.
 At the 
 in the 
 in Alaska, remains of a six-week-old infant were found. The baby's DNA showed that she belonged to a population that was genetically separate from other native groups present elsewhere in the 
 at the end of the 
. Ben Potter, the 
 archaeologist who unearthed the remains at the Upward Sun River site in 2013, named this new group 
.


The 
 developed a society with a 
 kinship system of property inheritance and descent in what is today Southeast Alaska, along with parts of 
 and the 
. Also in Southeast were the 
, now well known for their unique arts. The 
 people came to Alaska from British Columbia in 1887, when President 
, and later the U.S. Congress, granted them permission to settle on 
 and found the town of 
. All three of these peoples, as well as other 
, experienced 
 outbreaks from the late 18th through the mid-19th century, with the most devastating 
 occurring in the 1830s and 1860s, resulting in high fatalities and social disruption.


The Aleutian Islands are still home to the 
's seafaring society, although they were the first Native Alaskans to be exploited by the Russians. Western and Southwestern Alaska are home to the 
, while their cousins the 
 live in what is now Southcentral Alaska. The 
 of the northern Interior region are 
 and primarily known today for their dependence on the caribou within the much-contested 
. The North Slope and 
 are occupied by the widespread 
.

Some researchers believe the first Russian settlement in Alaska was established in the 17th century.
 According to this hypothesis, in 1648 several 
 of 
's expedition came ashore in Alaska by storm and founded this settlement. This hypothesis is based on the testimony of 
 geographer Nikolai Daurkin, who had visited Alaska in 1764–1765 and who had reported on a village on the Kheuveren River, populated by "bearded men" who "pray to the 
". Some modern researchers associate Kheuveren with 
.


The first European vessel to reach Alaska is generally held to be the 
 under the authority of the surveyor 
 and assistant navigator 
 on August 21, 1732, during an expedition of Siberian Cossack A. F. Shestakov and Russian explorer 
 (1729–1735).
 Another European contact with Alaska occurred in 1741, when 
 led an 
 for the Russian Navy aboard the 
. After his crew returned to Russia with 
 pelts judged to be the finest fur in the world, small associations of 
 began to sail from the shores of Siberia toward the Aleutian Islands. The first permanent European settlement was founded in 1784.

Between 1774 and 1800, 
 sent several 
 to assert its claim over the Pacific Northwest. In 1789, a Spanish settlement and 
 were built in 
. These expeditions gave names to places such as 
, 
, and 
. Later, the 
 carried out an expanded colonization program during the early-to-mid-19th century. 
, renamed 
 from 1804 to 1867, on 
 in the 
 in what is now 
, became the capital of 
. It remained the capital after the colony was transferred to the United States. The Russians never fully colonized Alaska, and the colony was never very profitable. Evidence of Russian settlement in names and churches survive throughout southeastern Alaska.

, the 24th 
, negotiated the 
 (also known as Seward's Folly) with the Russians in 1867 for $7.2 million. Russia's contemporary ruler 
 
, the 
, 
 and 
, also planned the sale;
 the purchase was made on March 30, 1867. Six months later the commissioners arrived in Sitka and the formal transfer was arranged; the formal flag-raising took place at Fort Sitka on October 18, 1867. In the ceremony 250 uniformed U.S. soldiers marched to the governor's house at "Castle Hill", where the Russian troops lowered the Russian flag and the U.S. flag was raised. This event is celebrated as 
, a legal holiday on October 18.

Alaska was loosely governed by the military initially, and was administered as a 
 starting in 1884, with a governor appointed by the United States president. A federal 
 was headquartered in Sitka. For most of Alaska's first decade under the United States flag, Sitka was the only community inhabited by American settlers. They organized a "provisional city government", which was Alaska's first municipal government, but not in a legal sense.
 Legislation allowing Alaskan communities to legally 
 did not come about until 1900, and 
 for cities was extremely limited or unavailable until statehood took effect in 1959.

Starting in the 1890s and stretching in some places to the early 1910s, gold rushes in Alaska and the nearby 
 brought thousands of miners and settlers to Alaska. Alaska was officially incorporated as an organized territory in 1912. Alaska's capital, which had been in 
 until 1906, was moved north to 
. Construction of the 
 began that same year. European immigrants from Norway and Sweden also settled in southeast Alaska, where they entered the fishing and logging industries.

During 
, the 
 focused on 
, 
 and 
, all of which were occupied by the 
.
 During the Japanese occupation, a white American civilian and two 
 personnel were killed at Attu and Kiska respectively, and nearly a total of 50 Aleut civilians and eight sailors were interned in Japan. About half of the Aleuts died during the period of internment.
 
/
 and 
 became significant bases for the 
, 
 and 
. The United States 
 program involved flying American warplanes through Canada to Fairbanks and then Nome; Soviet pilots took possession of these aircraft, ferrying them to fight the German invasion of the 
. The construction of military bases contributed to the population growth of some Alaskan cities.

Statehood for Alaska was an important cause of 
 early in his tenure as a congressional delegate. Decades later, the statehood movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1946. The Alaska Statehood Committee and Alaska's Constitutional Convention would soon follow. Statehood supporters also found themselves fighting major battles against political foes, mostly in the U.S. Congress but also within Alaska. Statehood was approved by the U.S. Congress on July 7, 1958; Alaska was officially proclaimed a state on January 3, 1959.

On March 27, 1964, the massive 
 killed 133 people and destroyed several villages and portions of large coastal communities, mainly by the resultant 
 and landslides. It was the 
 in recorded history, with a 
 of 9.2 (more than a thousand times as powerful as the 
).
 The time of day (5:36 pm), time of year (spring) and location of the 
 were all cited as factors in potentially sparing thousands of lives, particularly in Anchorage.

Lasting four minutes and thirty-eight seconds, the magnitude 9.2 
 remains the most powerful earthquake recorded in 
 history, and the second 
 in world history. Six hundred miles (970 km) of fault ruptured at once and moved up to 60 ft (18 m), releasing about 500 years of stress buildup. 
, fissures, landslides, and other ground failures caused major structural damage in several communities and much damage to property. 
 sustained great destruction or damage to many inadequately 
 houses, buildings, and infrastructure (paved streets, sidewalks, water and sewer mains, electrical systems, and other man-made equipment), particularly in the several landslide zones along 
. Two hundred miles (320 km) southwest, some areas near 
 were permanently raised by 30 feet (9 m). Southeast of Anchorage, areas around the head of 
 near 
 and 
 dropped as much as 8 feet (2.4 m), requiring reconstruction and fill to raise the 
 above the new high 
 mark.

In 
, 
 suffered a massive underwater landslide, resulting in the deaths of 32 people between the collapse of the 
 city harbor and docks, and inside the ship that was docked there at the time. Nearby, a 27-foot (8.2 m) tsunami destroyed the village of 
, killing 23 of the 68 people who lived there; survivors out-ran the wave, climbing to high ground. Post-quake tsunamis severely affected 
, 
, 
, and other Alaskan communities, as well as people and property in 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 Tsunamis also caused damage in 
 and 
. Evidence of motion directly related to the earthquake was also reported from 
 and 
.

The 1968 discovery of oil at 
 and the 1977 completion of the 
 led to an oil boom. Royalty revenues from oil have funded large state budgets from 1980 onward.

Oil production was not the only economic value of Alaska's land, however. In the second half of the 20th century, Alaska discovered 
 as an important source of revenue. Tourism became popular after World War II, when military personnel stationed in the region returned home praising its natural splendor. The 
, built during the war, and the 
, completed in 1963, made the state more accessible than before. Tourism became increasingly important in Alaska, and today over 1.4 million people visit the state each year.


With tourism more vital to the economy, 
 also rose in importance. The 
 (ANILCA) of 1980 added 53.7 million acres (217,000 km²) to the 
, parts of 25 rivers to the 
, 3.3 million acres (13,000 km²) to 
, and 43.6 million acres (176,000 km²) to 
. Because of the Act, Alaska now contains two-thirds of all American national parklands. Today, more than half of Alaskan land is owned by the 
.


In 1989, the 
 hit a reef in the 
, 
 more than 11 million U.S. gallons (42 
) of crude oil over 1,100 miles (1,800 km) of coastline. Today, the battle between philosophies of development and conservation is seen in the contentious debate over oil drilling in the 
 and the proposed 
.

The 
 was confirmed to have reached the U.S. state of Alaska on March 12, 2020.


On March 11, 
 
's office declared a state of emergency to ensure all entities have the necessary response resources.
 The next day, the first case, a foreign national in 
, was announced to the public.


On March 21, 2020, 
, a small, coastal town of approximately 8,000 residents located in 
 was determined to have a cluster of six COVID-19 cases. The town 
 for the following 14 days.
 On March 24, 2020, three more cases of COVID-19 were found in Ketchikan, bringing the total there to nine.
 The next day, the total cases there reached 11.
 On April 1, 2020, the number of positive cases of COVID-19 in Ketchikan rose to 14.


Located at the northwest corner of 
, Alaska is the northernmost and westernmost state in the United States, but also has the most easterly longitude in the United States because the 
 extend into the 
.
 Alaska is the only non-
 U.S. state on continental North America; about 500 miles (800 km) of 
 (Canada) separates Alaska from 
. It is technically part of the 
, but is sometimes not included in colloquial use; Alaska is not part of the 
, often called 
. The capital city, 
, is situated on the mainland of the North American continent but is not connected by road to the rest of the North American highway system.

The state is bordered by Canada's 
 and 
 to the east (making it the only state to only border a 
); the 
 and the Pacific Ocean to the south and southwest; the 
, 
, and 
 to the west; and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaska's territorial waters touch Russia's territorial waters in the Bering Strait, as the Russian 
 and Alaskan 
 are only 3 miles (4.8 km) apart. Alaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined.


At 663,268 square miles (1,717,856 km
) in total area, Alaska is by far the largest state in the United States. Alaska is more than twice the size of the second-largest U.S. state (Texas), and it is larger than the next three largest states (Texas, California, and Montana) combined. Alaska is the seventh 
. If it was an independent nation would be the 16th largest country in the world, larger than 
.

With its myriad islands, Alaska has nearly 34,000 miles (55,000 km) of tidal shoreline. The Aleutian Islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the 
. Many active 
 are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions. 
, for example, is home to 
, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to 10,000 feet (3,000 m) above the North Pacific. The chain of volcanoes extends to 
, west of Anchorage on the mainland. Geologists have identified Alaska as part of 
, a large region consisting of multiple states and Canadian provinces in the 
, which is actively undergoing 
.

One of the world's largest tides occurs in 
, just south of Anchorage, where tidal differences can be more than 35 feet (10.7 m).


Alaska has more than three million lakes.
 
 and wetland 
 cover 188,320 square miles (487,700 km
) (mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands). Glacier ice covers about 28,957 square miles (75,000 km
) of Alaska.
 The 
 is the largest glacier in North America, covering 2,008 square miles (5,200 km
) alone.


There are no officially defined borders demarcating the various regions of Alaska, but there are six widely accepted regions:

The most populous region of Alaska, containing 
, the 
 and the 
. Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south of the 
 and west of the 
 also fall within the definition of South Central, as do the 
 area and the communities of 
 and 
.


Also referred to as the Panhandle or 
, this is the region of Alaska closest to the contiguous states. As such, this was where most of the initial non-indigenous settlement occurred in the years following the 
. The region is dominated by the 
 as well as the 
, the largest national forest in the United States. It contains the state capital 
, the former capital 
, and 
, at one time Alaska's largest city.
 The 
 provides a vital surface transportation link throughout the area and country, as only three communities (
, 
 and 
) enjoy direct connections to the contiguous North American road system.


The Interior is the largest region of Alaska; much of it is uninhabited wilderness. 
 is the only large city in the region. 
 is located here. 
, formerly Mount McKinley, is the highest mountain in North America, and is also located here.

Southwest Alaska is a sparsely inhabited region stretching some 500 miles (800 km) inland from the Bering Sea. Most of the population lives along the coast. 
 is also located in Southwest. The massive 
, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here. Portions of the 
 are considered part of Southwest, with the remaining portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below).

The North Slope is mostly 
 peppered with small villages. The area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil and contains both the 
 and the 
.
 The city of 
, formerly known as Barrow, is the northernmost city in the United States and is located here. The 
, anchored by 
 and also containing the 
 valley, is often regarded as being part of this region. However, the respective 
 of the North Slope and of the Northwest Arctic seldom consider themselves to be one people.


More than 300 small volcanic islands make up this chain, which stretches more than 1,200 miles (1,900 km) into the Pacific Ocean. Some of these islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, but the 
 was drawn west of 
 to keep the whole state, and thus the entire North American continent, within the same legal day. Two of the islands, 
 and 
, were occupied by Japanese forces during World War II.

According to an October 1998 report by the 
, approximately 65% of Alaska is owned and managed by the 
 as public lands, including a multitude of 
, national parks, and 
.
 Of these, the 
 manages 87 million acres (35 million hectares), or 23.8% of the state. The 
 is managed by the 
. It is the world's largest wildlife refuge, comprising 16 million acres (6.5 million hectares).

Of the remaining land area, the state of Alaska owns 101 million acres (41 million hectares), its entitlement under the 
. A portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to the organized boroughs presented above, under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly formed boroughs. Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities. These are not very popular due to the often remote and roadless locations. The 
, as a 
, also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently.

Another 44 million acres (18 million hectares) are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under the 
 (ANCSA) of 1971. 
 
 often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other communications. Provisions of ANCSA allowing the corporations' land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1991 were repealed before they could take effect. Effectively, the corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual Alaskans) but cannot sell the land. 
 can be and are sold on the open market, however.

Various private interests own the remaining land, totaling about one percent of the state. Alaska is, by a large margin, the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when Native corporation holdings are excluded.

The Alaska Heritage Resources Survey (AHRS) is a restricted 
 of all reported 
 and 
 sites within the U.S. state of Alaska; it is maintained by the Office of History and Archaeology. The survey's inventory of cultural resources includes objects, structures, buildings, sites, districts, and travel ways, with a general provision that they are more than fifty years old. As of 31 January 2012
, more than 35,000 sites have been reported.


Alaska is not divided into 
, as most of the other U.S. states, but it is divided into 
.
 Delegates to the 
 wanted to avoid the pitfalls of the traditional county system and adopted their own unique model.
 Many of the more densely populated parts of the state are part of Alaska's 16 boroughs, which function somewhat similarly to counties in other states. However, unlike county-equivalents in the other 49 states, the boroughs do not cover the entire land area of the state. The area not part of any borough is referred to as the 
.

The Unorganized Borough has no government of its own, but the 
 in cooperation with the state divided the Unorganized Borough into 11 
 solely for the purposes of statistical analysis and presentation. A 
 is a mechanism for management of the 
 in Alaska. The state is divided into 34 recording districts which are centrally administered under a state 
. All recording districts use the same acceptance criteria, fee schedule, etc., for accepting documents into the public record.

Whereas many U.S. states use a three-tiered system of decentralization—state/county/township—most of Alaska uses only two tiers—state/borough. Owing to the low population density, most of the land is located in the 
. As the name implies, it has no intermediate borough government but is administered directly by the state government. In 2000, 57.71% of Alaska's area has this status, with 13.05% of the population.


Anchorage merged the city government with the Greater Anchorage Area Borough in 1975 to form the Municipality of Anchorage, containing the city proper and the communities of Eagle River, Chugiak, Peters Creek, Girdwood, Bird, and Indian. Fairbanks has a separate borough (the 
) and municipality (the City of Fairbanks).

The state's most populous city is 
, home to 291,247 people in 2020.
 The richest 
 is 
 ($42,245). 
, Sitka, Juneau, and Anchorage are the four 
.

As reflected in the 
, Alaska has a total of 355 incorporated cities and 
 (CDPs).
 The tally of cities includes four unified municipalities, essentially the equivalent of a 
. The majority of these communities are located in the rural expanse of Alaska known as "
" and are unconnected to that contiguous North American road network. The table at the bottom of this section lists about the 100 largest cities and census-designated places in Alaska, in population order.

Of Alaska's 2020 U.S. census population figure of 733,391, 16,655 people, or 2.27% of the population, did not live in an incorporated city or census-designated place.
 Approximately three-quarters of that figure were people who live in urban and suburban neighborhoods on the outskirts of the city limits of Ketchikan, Kodiak, Palmer and Wasilla. CDPs have not been established for these areas by the United States Census Bureau, except that seven CDPs were established for the Ketchikan-area neighborhoods in the 
 (Clover Pass, Herring Cove, Ketchikan East, Mountain Point, North 
, 
 and 
 East), but have not been used since. The remaining population was scattered throughout Alaska, both within organized boroughs and in the Unorganized Borough, in largely remote areas.


The climate in south and southeastern Alaska is a mid-latitude 
 (
: 
), and a subarctic oceanic climate (Köppen 
) in the northern parts. On an annual basis, the southeast is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year. Juneau averages over 50 in (130 cm) of precipitation a year, and 
 averages over 150 in (380 cm).
 This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.
The climate of 
 and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the region's proximity to the seacoast. While the area gets less rain than southeast Alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer. On average, 
 receives 16 in (41 cm) of precipitation a year, with around 75 in (190 cm) of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow. It is a subarctic climate (
) due to its brief, cool summers.

The climate of 
 is determined in large part by the 
 and the 
. It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north. The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is. This region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation. An area stretching from the northern side of the Seward Peninsula to the 
 valley (i.e., the region around 
) is technically a 
, with portions receiving less than 10 in (25 cm) of precipitation annually. On the other extreme, some locations between 
 and 
 average around 100 in (250 cm) of precipitation.


The climate of the interior of Alaska is subarctic. Some of the highest and lowest temperatures in Alaska occur around the area near 
. The summers may have temperatures reaching into the 90s °F (the low-to-mid 30s °C), while in the winter, the temperature can fall below −60 °F (−51 °C). Precipitation is sparse in the Interior, often less than 10 in (25 cm) a year, but what precipitation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter.

The highest and lowest recorded temperatures in Alaska are both in the Interior. The highest is 100 °F (38 °C) in 
 (which is just 8 mi or 13 km inside the arctic circle) on June 27, 1915,
 making Alaska tied with Hawaii as the state with the lowest high temperature in the United States.
 The lowest official Alaska temperature is −80 °F (−62 °C) in 
 on January 23, 1971,
 one degree above the lowest temperature recorded in continental North America (in 
).


The climate in the extreme north of Alaska is 
 (
) with long, very cold winters and short, cool summers. Even in July, the average low temperature in 
 is 34 °F (1 °C).
 Precipitation is light in this part of Alaska, with many places averaging less than 10 in (25 cm) per year, mostly as snow which stays on the ground almost the entire year.

The 
 found in the 
 that the population of Alaska was 736,081 on April 1, 2020, a 3.6% increase since the 
.
 According to the 2010 United States census, the U.S. state of Alaska had a population of 710,231, increasing from 626,932 at the 2000 U.S. census.

In 2010, Alaska ranked as the 47th state by population, ahead of 
, 
, and 
 (and Washington, D.C.). Estimates show North Dakota ahead as of 2018
.
 Alaska is the least densely populated state, and one of the most sparsely populated areas in the world, at 1.2 inhabitants per square mile (0.46/km
), with the next state, Wyoming, at 5.8 inhabitants per square mile (2.2/km
).
 Alaska is by far the largest U.S. state by 
, and the tenth wealthiest (per capita income).
 As of 2018
 due to its population size, it is one of 14 U.S. states that still have only one telephone 
.


The 2019 
 estimated 60.2% of the population was 
, 3.7% 
, 15.6% 
, 6.5% 
, 1.4% 
, 7.5% two or more races, and 7.3% 
 of any race. At the survey estimates, 7.8% of the total population was foreign-born from 2015 to 2019.
 In 2015, 61.3% was non-Hispanic white, 3.4% black or African American, 13.3% American Indian or Alaska Native, 6.2% Asian, 0.9% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 0.3% some other race, and 7.7% multiracial. Hispanics and Latin Americans were 7% of the state population in 2015.
 From 2015 to 2019, the largest Hispanic and Latin American groups were 
, 
, and 
. The largest Asian groups living in the state were 
, 
, and 
 and 
.


The state was 66.7% white (64.1% non-Hispanic white), 14.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 5.4% Asian, 3.3% black or African American, 1.0% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 1.6% from some other race, and 7.3% from two or more races in 2010. Hispanics or Latin Americans of any race made up 5.5% of the population in 2010.
 As of 2011
, 50.7% of Alaska's population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups (i.e., did not have two parents of non-Hispanic white ancestry).
 In 1960, the United States Census Bureau reported Alaska's population as 77.2% white, 3% black, and 18.8% American Indian and Alaska Native.


According to the 2011 American Community Survey, 83.4% of people over the age of five spoke only English at home. About 3.5% spoke Spanish at home, 2.2% spoke another 
, about 4.3% spoke an 
 language (including 
),
 and about 5.3% spoke other languages at home.
 In 2019, the American Community Survey determined 83.7% spoke only English, and 16.3% spoke another language other than English. The most spoken European language after English was Spanish, spoken by approximately 4.0% of the state population. Collectively, Asian and Pacific Islander languages were spoken by 5.6% of Alaskans.
 Since 2010, a total of 5.2% of Alaskans speak one of the state's 20 
,
 known locally as "native languages".

The 
 at the 
 claims that at least 20 
 exist and there are also some languages with different dialects.
 Most of Alaska's native languages belong to either the 
 or 
 language families; however, some languages are thought to be 
 (e.g. 
) or have not yet been classified (e.g. 
).
 As of 2014
 nearly all of Alaska's native languages were classified as either threatened, shifting, moribund, nearly extinct, or dormant languages.


In October 2014, the governor of Alaska signed a bill declaring the state's 20 indigenous languages to have official status.
 This bill gave them symbolic recognition as official languages, though they have not been adopted for official use within the government. The 20 languages that were included in the bill are:

According to statistics collected by the 
 from 2010, about 34% of Alaska residents were members of religious congregations. Of the religious population, 100,960 people identified as 
; 50,866 as Roman Catholic; and 32,550 as mainline Protestants.
 Roughly 4% were Mormon, 0.5% 
, 0.5% Muslim, 1% Buddhist, 0.2% Baháʼí, and 0.5% Hindu.
 The largest religious denominations in Alaska as of 2010
 was the 
 with 50,866 adherents; non-denominational Evangelicals with 38,070 adherents; 
 with 32,170 adherents; and the 
 with 19,891 adherents.
 Alaska has been identified, along with Washington and Oregon in the Pacific Northwest, as being 
, in terms of church membership.


The Pew Research Center in 2014 determined 62% of the adult population practiced Christianity. Protestantism was the largest Christian tradition, dominated by Evangelicalism. Mainline Protestants were the second largest Protestant Christian group, followed by 
. The Roman Catholic Church remained the largest single Christian tradition practiced in Alaska. Of the unaffiliated population, they made up the largest non-Christian religious affiliation. 
 made up 5% of the population and the largest non-Christian religion was 
. In 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 57% of adults were Christian.


In 1795, the first 
 was established in 
. Intermarriage with Alaskan Natives helped the Russian immigrants integrate into society. As a result, an increasing number of Russian Orthodox churches gradually became established within Alaska.
 Alaska also has the largest 
 population (by percentage) of any state.
 In 2009, there were 6,000 Jews in Alaska (for whom observance of 
 
).
 Alaskan Hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other Asian religious communities, including 
 and 
.
 In 2010, Alaskan Hindus established the 
, making it the first Hindu Temple in Alaska and the northernmost Hindu Temple in the world. There are an estimated 2,000–3,000 Hindus in Alaska. The vast majority of Hindus live in Anchorage or Fairbanks.

Estimates for the number of Muslims in Alaska range from 2,000 to 5,000.
 The 
 began efforts in the late 1990s to construct a mosque in Anchorage. They broke ground on a building in south Anchorage in 2010 and were nearing completion in late 2014. When completed, the mosque will be the first in the state and one of the northernmost mosques in the world.
 There's also a 
 center.
 

As of October 2022, Alaska had a total employment of 316,900. The number of employer establishments was 21,077.


The 2018 
 was $55 billion, 48th in the U.S. Its 
 for 2018 was $73,000, ranking 7th in the nation. According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Alaska had the fifth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.75 percent.
 The oil and gas industry dominates the Alaskan economy, with more than 80% of the state's revenues derived from petroleum extraction. Alaska's main export product (excluding oil and natural gas) is seafood, primarily salmon, cod, pollock and crab.

Agriculture represents a very small fraction of the Alaskan economy. Agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock, dairy products, vegetables, and livestock. Manufacturing is limited, with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere.

Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation. Military bases are a significant component of the economy in the Fairbanks North Star, Anchorage and Kodiak Island boroughs, as well as Kodiak. Federal subsidies are also an important part of the economy, allowing the state to keep taxes low. Its industrial outputs are crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, 
, 
, 
 and other mining, seafood processing, timber and wood products. There is also a growing service and tourism sector. Tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging.

Alaska has vast energy resources, although its oil reserves have been largely depleted. Major oil and gas reserves were found in the 
 (ANS) and Cook Inlet basins, but according to the 
, by February 2014 Alaska had fallen to fourth place in the nation in crude oil production after Texas, North Dakota, and California.
 Prudhoe Bay on Alaska's North Slope is still the second highest-yielding oil field in the United States, typically producing about 400,000 barrels per day (64,000 m
/d), although by early 2014 North Dakota's 
 was producing over 900,000 barrels per day (140,000 m
/d).
 Prudhoe Bay was the largest 
 field ever discovered in North America, but was much smaller than Canada's enormous 
 field, which by 2014 was producing about 1,500,000 barrels per day (240,000 m
/d) of 
, and had hundreds of years of producible reserves at that rate.


The 
 can transport and pump up to 2.1 million barrels (330,000 m
) of crude oil per day, more than any other crude oil pipeline in the United States. Additionally, substantial coal deposits are found in Alaska's bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite coal basins. The 
 estimates that there are 85.4 trillion cubic feet (2,420 km
) of undiscovered, technically recoverable gas from natural gas hydrates on the Alaskan North Slope.
 Alaska also offers some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers. Large swaths of the Alaskan coastline offer wind and geothermal energy potential as well.


Alaska's economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating, transportation, electric power and light. Although wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped, proposals for statewide energy systems (e.g. with special 
) were judged uneconomical (at the time of the report, 2001) due to low (less than 50¢/gal) fuel prices, long distances and low population.
 The cost of a gallon of gas in urban Alaska today is usually thirty to sixty cents higher than the national average; prices in rural areas are generally significantly higher but vary widely depending on transportation costs, seasonal usage peaks, nearby petroleum development infrastructure and many other factors.

The 
 is a constitutionally authorized appropriation of oil revenues, established by voters in 1976 to manage a surplus in state petroleum revenues from oil, largely in anticipation of the then recently constructed 
. The fund was originally proposed by Governor 
 on the eve of the 1969 Prudhoe Bay lease sale, out of fear that the legislature would spend the entire proceeds of the sale (which amounted to $900 million) at once. It was later championed by Governor 
 and 
 
 Hugh Malone. It has served as an attractive political prospect ever since, diverting revenues which would normally be deposited into the general fund.

The 
 was written so as to discourage dedicating state funds for a particular purpose. The Permanent Fund has become the rare exception to this, mostly due to the political climate of distrust existing during the time of its creation. From its initial principal of $734,000, the fund has grown to $50 billion as a result of oil royalties and capital investment programs.
 Most if not all the principal is invested conservatively outside Alaska. This has led to frequent calls by Alaskan politicians for the Fund to make investments within Alaska, though such a stance has never gained momentum.

Starting in 1982, dividends from the fund's annual growth have been paid out each year to eligible Alaskans, ranging from an initial $1,000 in 1982 (equal to three years' payout, as the distribution of payments was held up in a lawsuit over the distribution scheme) to $3,269 in 2008 (which included a one-time $1,200 "Resource Rebate"). Every year, the state legislature takes out 8% from the earnings, puts 3% back into the principal for inflation proofing, and the remaining 5% is distributed to all qualifying Alaskans. To qualify for the Permanent Fund Dividend, one must have lived in the state for a minimum of 12 months, maintain constant residency subject to allowable absences,
 and not be subject to court judgments or criminal convictions which fall under various disqualifying classifications or may subject the payment amount to civil garnishment.

The Permanent Fund is often considered to be one of the leading examples of a 
 policy in the world.


The cost of goods in Alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 48 states. Federal government employees, particularly 
 (USPS) workers and active-duty military members, receive a Cost of Living Allowance usually set at 25% of base pay because, while the cost of living has gone down, it is still one of the highest in the country.


Rural Alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods compared to the rest of the country, due to the relatively limited transportation infrastructure.


Due to the northern climate and short growing season, relatively little farming occurs in Alaska. Most farms are in either the 
, about 40 miles (64 km) northeast of 
, or on the 
, about 60 miles (97 km) southwest of Anchorage. The short 100-day growing season limits the crops that can be grown, but the long sunny summer days make for productive growing seasons. The primary crops are potatoes, carrots, lettuce, and cabbage.

The 
 is another notable agricultural locus, especially the 
 area, about 100 miles (160 km) southeast of Fairbanks, with a sizable concentration of farms growing agronomic crops; these farms mostly lie north and east of 
. This area was largely set aside and developed under a state program spearheaded by Hammond during his second term as governor. Delta-area crops consist predominantly of barley and hay. West of Fairbanks lies another concentration of small farms catering to restaurants, the hotel and tourist industry, and 
.

Alaskan agriculture has experienced a surge in growth of 
, small farms and 
 in recent years, with the highest percentage increase (46%) in the nation in growth in farmers' markets in 2011, compared to 17% nationwide.
 The 
 industry has also taken off, as the growing season allows farmers to harvest during a gap in supply elsewhere in the world, thereby filling a niche in the flower market.


Alaska, with no counties, lacks county fairs. However, a small assortment of state and local fairs (with the 
 in 
 the largest), are held mostly in the late summer. The fairs are mostly located in communities with historic or current agricultural activity, and feature local farmers exhibiting produce in addition to more high-profile commercial activities such as carnival rides, concerts and food. "Alaska Grown" is used as an agricultural slogan.

Alaska has an abundance of seafood, with the primary fisheries in the Bering Sea and the North Pacific. Seafood is one of the few food items that is often cheaper within the state than outside it. Many Alaskans take advantage of salmon seasons to harvest portions of their household diet while fishing for subsistence, as well as sport. This includes fish taken by hook, net or 
.


Hunting for subsistence, primarily 
, 
, and 
 is still common in the state, particularly in remote 
 communities. An example of a traditional native food is 
, the Eskimo ice cream, which can consist of reindeer fat, seal oil, dried fish meat and local berries.

Alaska's reindeer herding is concentrated on 
, where wild caribou can be prevented from mingling and migrating with the domesticated reindeer.


Most food in Alaska is transported into the state from 
 (the other 49 US states), and shipping costs make food in the cities relatively expensive. In rural areas, subsistence hunting and gathering is an essential activity because imported food is prohibitively expensive. Although most small towns and villages in Alaska lie along the coastline, the cost of importing food to remote villages can be high, because of the terrain and difficult road conditions, which change dramatically, due to varying climate and precipitation changes. The cost of transport can reach as high as 50¢ per pound ($1.10/kg) or more in some remote areas, during the most difficult times, if these locations can be reached at all during such inclement weather and terrain conditions. The cost of delivering a 1 US gallon (3.8 L) of milk is about $3.50 in many villages where per capita income can be $20,000 or less. Fuel cost per gallon is routinely twenty to thirty cents higher than the contiguous United States average, with only Hawaii having higher prices.


Some of Alaska's popular annual events are the 
 from Anchorage to Nome, World Ice Art Championships in Fairbanks, the Blueberry Festival and Alaska Hummingbird Festival in 
, the Sitka Whale Fest, and the Stikine River Garnet Fest in 
. The 
 attracts the largest springtime concentration of 
 in the world.

The 
 celebrates the rich heritage of Alaska's 11 cultural groups. Their purpose is to encourage cross-cultural exchanges among all people and enhance self-esteem among Native people. The 
 promotes and markets Native art from all regions and cultures in the State, using the internet.


Influences on music in Alaska include the traditional music of Alaska Natives as well as folk music brought by later immigrants from Russia and Europe. Prominent musicians from Alaska include singer 
, traditional Aleut flautist 
, folk singer-songwriter 
, Christian music singer-songwriter 
, metal/post hardcore band 
 and the groups 
 and 
.

There are many established music festivals in Alaska, including the 
, the Fairbanks Summer Arts Festival the Anchorage Folk Festival, the 
, the Sitka Jazz Festival, and the 
. The most prominent orchestra in Alaska is the 
, though the Fairbanks Symphony Orchestra and 
 are also notable. The 
 is currently the state's only professional opera company, though there are several volunteer and semi-professional organizations in the state as well.

The official 
 of Alaska is "
", which was adopted in 1955; it celebrates the 
.

Alaska's first independent picture entirely made in Alaska was 
, produced by Alaskan businessman 
 and filmed in and around Anchorage. Released in 1924 by the Alaska Moving Picture Corporation, it was the only film the company made.

One of the most prominent movies filmed in Alaska is 
's 
, starring Alaska Native 
. In 1932, an expedition set out from 
's studios in Hollywood to Alaska to film what was then billed as "The Biggest Picture Ever Made". Upon arriving in Alaska, they set up "Camp Hollywood" in Northwest Alaska, where they lived during the duration of the filming. 
 spared no expense in spite of the remote location, going so far as to hire the chef from the 
 in Hollywood to prepare meals.


When 
 premiered at the 
 in New York City, the studio received the largest amount of feedback in its history. 
 was critically acclaimed and released worldwide; as a result, Mala became an international movie star. 
 won the first Oscar for 
 at the Academy Awards, and showcased and preserved aspects of 
 culture on film.

The 1983 Disney movie 
 was at least partially shot in Alaska. The 1991 film 
, based on 
's 1906 novel and starring 
, was filmed in and around 
. 
's 1994 
, starring 
, was filmed in part at the 
 near 
.
 The 1999 
 film 
, starring 
, 
, and 
, was filmed in Juneau.

The psychological thriller 
, starring 
 and 
, was shot in Canada, but was set in Alaska. The 2007 film directed by Sean Penn, 
, was partially filmed and set in Alaska. The film, which is based on the novel of the same name, follows the adventures of 
, who died in a remote abandoned bus along the 
 west of 
 in 1992.

Many films and television shows set in Alaska are not filmed there; for example, 
, set in the fictional town of Cicely, Alaska, was filmed in 
. The 2007 horror feature 
 is set in 
, but was filmed in New Zealand.

Many reality television shows are filmed in Alaska. In 2011, the 
 found ten set in the state.


The 2020 videogame 
 takes place around Southern Alaska and includes representation of 
 culture.

The 
 are Alaska's statewide police force. They have a long and storied history, but were not an official organization until 1941. Before the force was officially organized, law enforcement in Alaska was handled by various federal agencies. Larger towns usually have their own local police and some villages rely on "Public Safety Officers" who have police training but do not carry firearms. In much of the state, the troopers serve as the only police force available. In addition to enforcing traffic and criminal law, wildlife Troopers enforce hunting and fishing regulations. Due to the varied terrain and wide scope of the Troopers' duties, they employ a wide variety of land, air, and water patrol vehicles.

Many rural communities in Alaska are considered "dry", having outlawed the importation of alcoholic beverages.
 Suicide rates for rural residents are higher than urban.


 and other violent crimes are also at high levels in the state; this is in part linked to alcohol abuse.
 Alaska has the highest rate of sexual assault in the nation, especially in rural areas. The average age of sexually assaulted victims is 16 years old. In four out of five cases, the suspects were relatives, friends or acquaintances.


As of 2022
 and 
 account for 47% and 46% of private health insurance, respectively.
 Premera and 
 offer insurance on the federally-run Affordable Care Exchange.


The 
 administers many 
 in Alaska. In addition, the state operates a boarding school, 
 in 
, and provides partial funding for other boarding schools, including 
 in 
 and The Galena Interior Learning Academy in 
.


There are more than a dozen 
. Accredited universities in Alaska include the 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 Alaska is the only state that has no collegiate athletic programs that are members of 
, although both Alaska-Fairbanks and Alaska-Anchorage maintain single sport membership in Division I for 
.

The Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development operates AVTEC, Alaska's Institute of Technology.
 Campuses in Seward and Anchorage offer one-week to 11-month training programs in areas as diverse as Information Technology, Welding, Nursing, and Mechanics.

Alaska has had a problem with a "
". Many of its young people, including most of the highest academic achievers, leave the state after high school graduation and do not return. As of 2013
, Alaska did not have a 
 or medical school.
 The 
 has attempted to combat this by offering partial four-year scholarships to the top 10% of Alaska high school graduates, via the Alaska Scholars Program.


Beginning in 1998, schools in rural Alaska must have at least 10 students to retain funding from the state, and campuses not meeting the number close. This was due to the loss in oil revenues that previously propped up smaller rural schools.
 In 2015, there was a proposal to raise that minimum to 25,
 but legislators in the state largely did not agree.


Alaska has few road connections compared to the rest of the U.S. The state's road system, covering a relatively small area of the state, linking the central population centers and the 
, the principal route out of the state through Canada. The state capital, Juneau, is not accessible by road, only a car ferry; this has spurred debate over decades about moving the capital to a city on the road system, or building a road connection from 
. The western part of Alaska has no road system connecting the communities with the rest of Alaska.

The 
 consists of a total of 1,082 miles (1,741 km). One unique feature of the Alaska Highway system is the 
, an active 
 tunnel recently upgraded to provide a paved roadway link with the isolated community of 
 on 
 to the 
 about 50 miles (80 km) southeast of Anchorage at 
. At 2.5 miles (4.0 km), the tunnel was the longest road tunnel in North America until 2007.
 The tunnel is the longest combination 
 in North America.

The 
, near its intersection with the 


The 
 bridge on the 
 is 1,036 feet (316 m) long.



Alaska welcome sign on the 


Built around 1915, the 
 (ARR) played a key role in the development of Alaska through the 20th century. It links north Pacific shipping through providing critical infrastructure with tracks that run from 
 to 
 by way of 
, passing through Anchorage, 
, Wasilla, 
, 
, and Fairbanks, with spurs to 
, 
 and 
. The cities, towns, villages, and region served by ARR tracks are known statewide as "The Railbelt". In recent years, the ever-improving paved highway system began to eclipse the railroad's importance in Alaska's economy.

The railroad played a vital role in Alaska's development, moving freight into Alaska while transporting natural resources southward, such as coal from the Usibelli coal mine near 
 to Seward and gravel from the 
 to Anchorage. It is well known for its summertime tour passenger service.

The Alaska Railroad was one of the last railroads in North America to use 
 in regular service and still uses them on some gravel trains. It continues to offer one of the last 
 routes in the country. A stretch of about 60 miles (100 km) of track along an area north of Talkeetna remains inaccessible by road; the railroad provides the only transportation to rural homes and cabins in the area. Until construction of the Parks Highway in the 1970s, the railroad provided the only land access to most of the region along its entire route.

In northern Southeast Alaska, the 
 also partly runs through the state from 
 northwards into Canada (British Columbia and Yukon Territory), crossing the border at 
 Summit. This line is now mainly used by tourists, often arriving by cruise liner at Skagway. It was featured in the 1983 
 television series 


The Alaska Rail network is not connected to Outside. (The nearest link to the North American railway network is the northwest terminus of the 
 at 
, several hundred miles to the southeast.) In 2000, the U.S. Congress authorized $6 million to study the feasibility of a rail link between Alaska, Canada, and the lower 48.


Some private companies provides 
 service between 
 and 
.

An 
 locomotive over a bridge in Girdwood approaching Anchorage (2007)

The 
 traverses rugged terrain north of 
 near the 
.

Many cities, towns and villages in the state do not have road or highway access; the only modes of access involve travel by air, river, or the sea.

Alaska's well-developed state-owned ferry system (known as the 
) serves the cities of 
, the Gulf Coast and the Alaska Peninsula. The ferries transport vehicles as well as passengers. The system also operates a ferry service from 
 and 
, in Canada through the 
 to 
. The 
 also serves as an important marine link for many communities in the 
 region of Southeast and works in concert with the Alaska Marine Highway.

In recent years, cruise lines have created a summertime tourism market, mainly connecting the Pacific Northwest to Southeast Alaska and, to a lesser degree, towns along Alaska's gulf coast. The population of 
 for example fluctuates dramatically on many days—up to four large cruise ships can dock there at the same time.

Cities not served by road, sea, or river can be reached only by air, foot, 
, or 
, accounting for Alaska's extremely well developed 
 air services—an Alaskan novelty. Anchorage and, to a lesser extent Fairbanks, is served by 
. Because of limited highway access, air travel remains the most efficient form of transportation in and out of the state. Anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and construction at 
 to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism (in 2012–2013, Alaska received almost two million visitors).


Regular flights to most villages and towns within the state that are commercially viable are challenging to provide, so they are heavily subsidized by the federal government through the 
 program. 
 is the only major airline offering in-state travel with jet service (sometimes in combination cargo and passenger 
-400s) from Anchorage and 
 to regional hubs like 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and other larger communities as well as to major Southeast and Alaska Peninsula communities.

The bulk of remaining commercial flight offerings come from small regional commuter airlines such as 
, 
, and 
. The smallest towns and villages must rely on scheduled or chartered bush flying services using general aviation aircraft such as the 
, the most popular aircraft in use in the state. Much of this service can be attributed to the Alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to Alaskan rural communities. The program requires 70% of that subsidy to go to carriers who offer passenger service to the communities.

Many communities have small air taxi services. These operations originated from the demand for customized transport to remote areas. Perhaps the most quintessentially Alaskan plane is the bush seaplane. The world's busiest seaplane base is 
, located next to Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, where flights bound for remote villages without an airstrip carry passengers, cargo, and many items from stores and warehouse clubs.

In 2006, Alaska had the highest number of pilots per capita of any U.S. state.
 In Alaska there are 8,795 active pilot certificates as of 2020. 

 Of these, there are 2,507 Private, 1,496 Commercial, 2,180 Airline Transport, and 2,239 student pilots. There are also 3,987 pilots with an Instrument rating and 1,511 Flight Instructors.

Another Alaskan transportation method is the 
. In modern times (that is, any time after the mid-late 1920s), dog 
 is more of a sport than a true means of transportation. Various races are held around the state, but the best known is the 
, a 1,150-mile (1,850 km) trail from Anchorage to Nome (although the distance varies from year to year, the official distance is set at 1,049 miles or 1,688 km). The race commemorates the famous 
 in which mushers and dogs like 
 and 
 took much-needed medicine to the 
-stricken community of 
 when all other means of transportation had failed. Mushers from all over the world come to Anchorage each March to compete for cash, prizes, and prestige. The "Serum Run" is another sled dog race that more accurately follows the route of the famous 1925 relay, leaving from the community of 
 (southwest of Fairbanks) to Nome.


In areas not served by road or rail, primary transportation in summer is by 
 and in winter by 
 or "snow machine", as it is commonly referred to in Alaska.


Alaska's internet and other data transport systems are provided largely through the two major telecommunications companies: 
 and 
. GCI owns and operates what it calls the Alaska United Fiber Optic system
 and, as of late 2011, Alaska Communications advertised that it has "two fiber optic paths to the lower 48 and two more across Alaska.
 In January 2011, it was reported that a $1 billion project to connect Asia and rural Alaska was being planned, aided in part by $350 million in stimulus from the federal government.


Like all other U.S. states, Alaska is governed as a republic, with three 
: an 
 consisting of the 
 and their appointees which head executive departments; a 
 consisting of the 
 and 
; and a 
 consisting of the 
 and lower courts.

The state of Alaska employs approximately 16,000 people statewide.


The 
 consists of a 40-member 
 and a 20-member 
. Senators serve four-year terms and House members two. The 
 serves four-year terms. The 
 runs separately from the governor in the 
, but during the general election, the nominee for governor and nominee for lieutenant governor run together on the same ticket.

Alaska's court system has four levels: the 
, the 
, the superior courts and the district courts.
 The superior and district courts are 
. Superior courts are courts of general jurisdiction, while district courts hear only certain types of cases, including misdemeanor criminal cases and civil cases valued up to $100,000.


The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals are 
. The Court of Appeals is required to hear appeals from certain lower-court decisions, including those regarding criminal prosecutions, juvenile delinquency, and 
.
 The Supreme Court hears civil appeals and may in its discretion hear criminal appeals.


Although in its early years of statehood Alaska was a 
 state, since the early 1970s it has been characterized as 
-leaning.
 Local political communities have often worked on issues related to land use development, fishing, tourism, and individual rights. 
, while organized in and around their communities, have been active within the 
. These have been given ownership over large tracts of land, which require stewardship.

Alaska was formerly the only state in which possession of one ounce or less of marijuana in one's home was completely legal under state law, though the federal law remains in force.


The state has an independence movement favoring a vote on secession from the United States, with the 
.


Six 
 and four 
 have served as governor of Alaska. In addition, Republican governor 
 was elected to the office for a second term in 1990 after leaving the Republican party and briefly joining the Alaskan Independence Party ticket just long enough to be reelected. He officially rejoined the Republican party in 1994.

Alaska's 
 took effect on February 24, 2015, placing Alaska alongside Colorado and Washington as the first three U.S. states where recreational marijuana is legal. The new law means people over 21 can consume small amounts of cannabis.
 The first legal marijuana store opened in Valdez in October 2016.


To finance state government operations, Alaska depends primarily on petroleum revenues and federal subsidies. This allows it to have the lowest individual tax burden in the United States.
 It is one of five states with no 
, one of seven states with no individual 
, and—along with 
—one of two that has neither.
 The Department of Revenue Tax Division
 reports regularly on the state's revenue sources. The department also issues an annual summary of its operations, including new state laws that directly affect the tax division. In 2014, the 
 ranked Alaska as having the fourth most "business friendly" tax policy, behind only 
, 
, and 
.


While Alaska has no state sales tax, 89 municipalities collect a local sales tax, from 1.0 to 7.5%, typically 3–5%. Other local taxes levied include raw fish taxes, hotel, motel, and bed-and-breakfast 'bed' taxes, 
, liquor and tobacco taxes, gaming (pull tabs) taxes, tire taxes and fuel transfer taxes. A part of the revenue collected from certain state taxes and license fees (such as petroleum, aviation motor fuel, telephone cooperative) is shared with municipalities in Alaska.

The fall in oil prices after the 
 in the early 2010s has decimated Alaska's state treasury, which has historically received about 85 percent of its revenue from taxes and fees imposed on oil and gas companies.
 The state government has had to drastically reduce its budget, and has brought its budget shortfall from over $2 billion in 2016 to under $500 million by 2018. In 2020, Alaska's state government budget was $4.8 billion, while projected government revenues were only $4.5 billion.


Alaska regularly supports 
 in presidential elections and has done so since statehood. Republicans have won the state's 
 votes in all but one election that it has participated in (
). No state has voted for a 
 presidential candidate fewer times. Alaska was carried by Democratic nominee 
 during his landslide election in 
, while the 
 and 
 elections were close. Since 
, however, Republicans have carried the state by large margins. In 
, Republican 
 defeated Democrat 
 in Alaska, 59.49% to 37.83%. McCain's running mate was 
, the state's governor and the first Alaskan on a major party ticket. Obama lost Alaska again in 
, but he captured 40% of the state's vote in that election, making him the first Democrat to do so since 1968. In 
, 
 received 42.77% of the vote for president, marking the high point for a Democratic presidential candidate since Johnson's 1964 victory.

The 
, central Juneau, midtown and downtown Anchorage, and the areas surrounding the 
 campus and Ester have been strongholds of the Democratic Party. The Matanuska-Susitna Borough, the majority of Fairbanks (including North Pole and the military base), and South Anchorage typically have the strongest Republican showing.

Alaska has had a long history of primary defeats for incumbent U.S. Senators, with 
, 
 and 
 all being defeated for the nomination to their re-election. However, Murkowski 
 with a write-in campaign. Despite this, Alaska has had some long-serving congressmen, with 
 serving as U.S. Senator for 40 years, and 
 serving as the at-large representative for 49 years.

In a 2020 study, Alaska was ranked as the 15th hardest state for citizens to vote in.


In the 
 cycle, Alaskan voters approved Ballot Measure 2.
 The measure passed by a margin of 1.1%, or about 4,000 votes.
 The measure requires campaigns to disclose the original source and any intermediaries for campaign contributions over $2,000. The measure also establishes 
 for statewide elections (like in 
 and 
) and 
 (like in 
).
 Measure 2 makes Alaska the third state with 
 for all statewide races, the second state with 
, and the only state with both.

The first race to use the new system of elections was the 
 to fill Alaska's only U.S. House seat, left vacant by the death of 
, won by 
, the first Democrat to win the House seat since 
, and the first 
 to be elected to the 
 in history.

, 


, 


, senior 


, junior United States senator

, United States 







The 
 (
 
) (
: 
; 
: 
) is the unit of 
 of 
. It is the fourth historical and only current 
 in the 
 of Ghana. One cedi is divided into one hundred pesewas (Gp).


After 
, Ghana separated itself from the 
, which was the currency of the British colonies in the region. The new republic's first independent currency was the 
 (1958–1965).  In 1965, Ghana decided to leave the British 
 
 and adopt the widely accepted 
 system. The African name Cedi (1965–1967) was introduced in place of the old 
. Ghana's first President Dr. 
 introduced Cedi notes and Pesewa coins in July 1965 to replace the Ghanaian pounds, 
 and pence. The cedi bore the portrait of the President and was equivalent to eight shillings and four pence (8s 4d), i.e. one hundred old pence, so that 1 pesewa was equal to one penny.

After the 
, the new leaders wanted to remove the face of Nkrumah from the banknotes. The "new cedi" (1967–2007) was worth 1.2 cedis, which made it equal to half of a pound sterling (or ten 
 sterling) at its introduction. Decades of high 
 devalued the new cedi, so that in 2007 the largest of the "new cedi" banknotes, the 20,000 note, had a value of about US$2. The new cedi was gradually phased out in 2007 in favor of the "Ghana cedi" at an exchange rate of 1:10,000. By removing four digits, the Ghana cedi became the highest-denominated 
. It has since lost over 90% of its value.

The word 
 is the 
 word for 
 shell. Cowries (plural of cowry) were formerly used as currency in what is now Ghana. The 
 or money cowry is not native to 
 waters but is a common species in the 
. The 
-like shells came to West Africa, beginning in the 14th century, through trade with 
 merchants. The first modern coins exclusively used at the Gold Coast were produced in 1796 but 
 were used alongside coins and gold dust as currency until 1901.


The first cedi was introduced in 1965, replacing the 
 at a rate of 2.4 cedi = 1 pound, or 1 pesewa = 1 penny. The first cedi was pegged to 
 at a rate of 2.4 cedis = 1 pound or 8s 4d per cedi.

The first cedi was replaced in 1967 by a "new cedi" which was worth 1.2 first cedis. This allowed a 
 conversion with the pound, namely 2 second cedis = 1 pound. The change also provided an opportunity to remove 
's image from coins and notes.

The second cedi was initially pegged to sterling at a rate of ₵2 = £1 stg. However, within months, the second cedi was devalued to a rate of ₵2.45 = £1 stg, less than the initial value of the first cedi. This rate was equivalent to ₵1 = 0.98 
 and the rate to the dollar was maintained when sterling was devalued in November 1967. Further pegs were set of $0.55 in 1971, $0.78 in 1972, and $0.8696 in 1973 before the currency was floated in 1978. High 
 ensued, and so the cedi was re-pegged at ₵2.80 = $1.00.

The cedi's value continued to be eaten away on the 
. In the early 1980s, the government started cracking down hard on the retail of products at prices other than the official established sale price (also known as 
). This had the effect of driving nearly all commerce underground, where 
 prices for commodities were the norm, and nothing existed on store shelves. By 1983 the cedi was worth about 120 to one 
 on the black market, a pack of cigarettes cost about ₵150 (if they could be found), but the bank rate continued at ₵2.80 = $1.00. Finally, with 
 completely drying up for all import transactions, the government was forced to begin a process of gradual devaluation, and a 
 of its strict price controls. This process ended in 1990 with a free float of the cedi against foreign currencies. Inflation continued (see the 
 chart) until by July 2007, one US dollar was worth about ₵9500, and a transition to the third cedi was initiated.

In 1979 a currency confiscation took place. New 
 were issued which were exchanged for old ones at a rate of 10 old notes for 7 new ones. Coins and bank accounts were unaffected.

A second confiscation took place in 1982, when the ₵50 note (the highest denomination) was demonetized. Ghanaians, in theory, could exchange any number of ₵50 notes for coins or other banknotes without loss, but foreigners could not make any exchange. However, many Ghanaians who were hoarding large amounts of cedis feared reprisal if they tried to convert all of it, and so simply burned a lot of their money. Many other Ghanaians received "promise payment notes" from the banks, but never received compensation. This 
 was publicly justified as a means to create a disincentive for the flourishing black market. However, from a monetary perspective, currency confiscations have the effect of reducing the available cash in the economy, and thereby slowing the rate of inflation. After the ₵50 note confiscation, the ₵20 note was the highest cedi denomination, but had a street value of only about $0.35 (U.S.)

After the ₵50 note 
, fears existed that the government could also confiscate the ₵20 or even the ₵10 notes. This fear, along with inflation running at about 100% annually, started causing Ghanaians to lose their faith in their country's own currency. Some transactions could only then be done in foreign currencies (although that was technically illegal), and other, more routine transactions began to revert to 
.

In 1991, 10, 20, 50, and 100 cedi coins were introduced, followed by 200 and 500 cedis in 1996. These six denominations were still in circulation until 2007. However, the 10 cedis (~0.1 
) and 20 cedis (~0.2 U.S. cents) coins were not seen much due to their small value.


Because of the rampant inflation in the decades before the exchange the second cedi was only worth a small fraction of its original value. 
 decided to "cut" four zeros off the currency by switching to the third cedi. The new currency was not introduced as the third cedi but is instead officially called the "Ghanaian cedi" (GH₵), in contrast to the second cedi that was officially known as the "new cedi". In the second half of 2007 both the second and third cedi were legal tender as the old currency was being gradually withdrawn. At the end of December 2007, more than 90% of all old coins and notes had been withdrawn.
 From January 2008 old banknotes could only be exchanged at banks and were no longer legal tender.


On 14 May 2010, a GH₵2 banknote was issued to meet public need for an intermediate denomination and reduce the frequency, and associated cost, of printing large volumes of the GH₵1 banknote. The introduction of the new denomination coincided with the conclusion of the year-long centenary celebrations of the birth of 
, Ghana's first president, and has the commemorative text "
 of the Birth of Dr. Kwame Nkrumah".


Due to periods of "sustained high inflation" and "perennial depreciation of the currency", the 
 on 29 November 2019, announced the issuance of a new 2-cedi coin and as well as new 100 and 200-cedi banknotes. Existing 1 and 2 cedi banknotes remain legal tender, though these denominations will be gradually replaced by coins to reduce costs.

The third Cedi has been losing value continuously since it was introduced. In 2014, the inflation rose rapidly as the value of the third cedi fell to a fourth of its original value.
 The devaluation was temporarily halted in the last quarter of 2014 as the currency stabilized due to a pending IMF bailout of Ghana.


Due to its negligible purchasing power, the one pesewa coin is rarely seen in circulation. In September 2021, the Bank of Ghana began the process of withdrawing GH₵1 and GH₵2 notes from circulation to encourage the use of coins of their corresponding face values.


In August 2022, accelerating inflation and continued economic mismanagement has caused the cedi's value to drop to 10 U.S. cents (GH₵10 = US$1).
 As of September 2022
, the annual inflation rate of 37.2% as reported by the Ghana Statistical Service was the highest since 2001.


By October 2022, the cedi became the world's worst performing currency, having lost 60% of its value relative to the U.S. dollar since the end of 2021.
 The exchange rate as of 24 October 2022
 was about GH₵15 per U.S. dollar.


The 
 has been issuing all Ghanaian coins since 1958.
 Beside the coins in general circulation the bank have also issued commemorative coins
 These special coins have been issued in shillings (1958), crowns (1965), pounds (1958–1977), sikas (1997–2003) and cedis (2013-).
 It is unclear if the Bank of Ghana considered commemorative crowns and sikas together with  the commemorative pounds that were coined after 1965 as legal tender or simply as medallions.


Only coins that have been or are in general circulation are included in this list. The years of issue does not indicated that the series have been coined every year in the period but that the coin has been issued more than once in the stated period. Some coins are held back and released years after they are issued. This means that in the general circulation there are worn out coins and coins in mint condition from the same issuing year. The Bank of Ghana has never stated if they are simply holding back already stamped coins until they are needed or if they are stamping coins successively with old issue years.

The new coins are 1 pesewa (100 old cedi), 5 pesewas (500), 10 pesewas (1,000), 20 pesewas (2,000), 50 pesewas (5,000), 1 cedi (10,000) and 2 cedis (20,000).


The 
 has been issuing all Ghanaian banknotes since 1958.
 Most of the Ghanaian banknotes have been changed slightly from one year's issue to the next year's issue in the ongoing technological 
. The signature on the notes also changes when a new governor takes over the management of the Bank of Ghana.
 Such changes are frequent and are not covered in this list. The years of issue do not indicate that the series has been printed every year in the period, but that the banknote has been issued more than once in the given period.


				Pages for logged out editors 

			
 
 is a village in the administrative district of 
, within 
, 
, in north-central Poland.
 It lies 11 kilometres (7 mi) west of 
 and 21 km (13 mi) south of 
. It is located in the region of 
.

During 
, Opoczki was 
. The Germans renamed it to 
 in attempt to erase traces of Polish origin. In 1939–1940, they carried out 
, whose farms were then handed over to 
 as part of the 
 policy.
 Expelled Poles were either deported to the 
 in the more eastern part of German-occupied Poland or enslaved as 
 of German colonists in the area.






This 
 location article is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.
The 
 is the northeasternmost part of the tropical 
 from 
 in 
, north and west to 
 in 
.
 The intersection of the 
 and 
 (zero degrees 
 and 
) is in the gulf.


Among the many rivers that drain into the Gulf of Guinea are the 
 and the 
. The coastline on the gulf includes the 
 and the 
.

The origin of the name Guinea is thought to be an area in the region, although the specifics are disputed. Bovill (1995) gives a thorough description:


The name 
 is usually said to have been a corrupt form of the name 
, picked up by the Portuguese in the 
. The present writer finds this unacceptable. The name Guinea has been in use both in the Maghrib and in Europe long before Prince Henry's time. For example, on a map dated about 1320 by the Genoese cartographer Giovanni di Carignano, who got his information about Africa from a fellow-countryman in 
 [ancient trading city in North Africa], we find Gunuia, and in the Catalan atlas of 1375 as Ginyia. A passage in Leo [Africanus] (vol. III, 822) points to Guinea having been a corrupt form of 
 [2,000-year-old city in central Mali on Niger river], less famous than Ghana but nevertheless for many centuries famed in the Maghrib as a great market and a seat of learning. The relevant passage reads: "The Kingdom of Ghinea . . . called by the merchants of our nation Gheneoa, by the natural inhabitants thereof Genni and by the Portugals and other people of Europe Ghinea." But it seems more probable that Guinea derives from
, the Berber for Negro. Marrakech [city in southeastern Morocco] has a gate, built in the twelfth century, called the Bab Aguinaou, the Gate of the Negro (Delafosse, Haut-Sénégal-Niger, II, 277-278). The modern application of the name Guinea to the coast dates only from 1481. In that year the Portuguese built a fort, 
 (modern day 
), on the 
, and their king, John II, was permitted by the Pope [Sixtus II or Innocent VIII] to style himself Lord of Guinea, a title that survived until the recent extinction of the monarchy.
The name "
" was also applied to south coast of 
, north of the Gulf of Guinea, which became known as "Upper Guinea", and the west coast of 
, to the east, which became known as "Lower Guinea".
 The name "Guinea" is still attached to the names of three countries in Africa: 
, 
, and 
, as well as 
 in 
.

The main river shedding its waters in the gulf is the 
.

Different definitions of the geographic limits of the Gulf of Guinea are given; the 
 defines the southwest extent of the Gulf of Guinea as "B line from Cap Lopez (
), in Gabon, northwestward to 
 (
); and thence a line from Ihléu Gago Coutinho northwestward to Cape Palmas (
), in Liberia.


Old French map of the Gulf of Guinea

Different limits of the Gulf of Guinea

 of the Gulf of Guinea showing borders of states on its shores

The Gulf of Guinea contains a number of islands, the largest of which are in a southwest-northeast chain, forming part of the 
 of volcanoes.

, also known as Pagalu or Pigalu, is an island that is part of 
.

 is an island off the west coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea that is part of the 
 of 
.

 is an 
 off the 
 region of Cameroon in the Gulf of Guinea under the sovereignty of Equatorial Guinea.

 is an island belonging to Equatorial Guinea.

 and 
 are two small islands belonging to Equatorial Guinea.

 (officially the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe) is a Portuguese-speaking 
 in the Gulf of Guinea that became independent from 
 in 1975. It is located off the western equatorial coast of Africa and consists of two islands, 
 and 
. They are located about 140 kilometres (87 mi) apart and about 250 and 225 kilometres (155 and 140 mi), respectively, off the northwestern coast of 
. Both islands are part of an 
 
 
. São Tomé, the sizeable southern island, is situated just north of the 
.


Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea consists of 18 sovereign states.
 Multiple institutional mandates address maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea: The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS).
 Additionally, maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is also addressed by the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC).
 Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is characterised not only by piracy but by a myriad of maritime crimes despite piracy often dominating the conversation on maritime security. According to the ‘Priority Paper for the Danish Efforts to Combat Piracy and Other Types of Maritime Crime 2019-2022’ piracy and maritime crime are defined as follows:
 can be defined as any illegal act of violence, detention or depredation committed for private ends at high seas against another ship or aircraft.
 Maritime crime may include armed robbery at sea, trafficking of humans or smuggling of illicit goods, drugs and weapons, 
, fuel theft and more.
The other notable crimes in the Gulf of Guinea are illegal fishing, kidnap for ransom, drug trafficking and oil-bunkering.
 Illegal oil-bunkering consists of the attacking of vessels transporting oil and transferring the oil to the thieves’ own vessel.
 After which the oil is sold in local and international markets.

Kidnapping for ransom is one of the most prevalent maritime crimes in the region. Between 2018 and 2019, the number of crew members that were kidnapped in the Gulf of Guinea increased by 50%, leading the region to account for 90% of global kidnappings at sea.



				Pages for logged out editors 

			


 is a 
 in the family 
. It was described by 
 in 1920. It is found in 
.





This article relating to the 
 
 is a 
. You can help Wikipedia by 
.



 (historically spelled 
 or 
, usually spelled 
 in 
)
 is a city in the 
, and is among the 
 
 in Ghana. Kumasi is located in a 
 region near 
, and is the commercial, industrial, and cultural capital of the historical 
. Kumasi is approximately 500 kilometres (300 mi) north of 
 and 200 kilometres (100 mi) north of the 
. Kumasi is alternatively known as "The Garden City"
 because of its many species of flowers and plants in the past. It is also called Oseikrom (
's the first town).

Kumasi is the second-largest city in Ghana, after the capital, 
.
 The Central Business District of Kumasi includes areas such as 
, 
, Asawasi, Pampaso and 
 (popularly called Roman Hill), with a concentration of banks, department stalls, and hotels. Economic activities in Kumasi include financial and commercial sectors, pottery, clothing and textiles. There is a significant timber processing community in Kumasi serving the domestic market. Bantama High Street and Prempeh II Street in Bantama and Adum, respectively, are the business and entertainment hubs in Kumasi.

There is evidence that the area around Kumasi has been kept cleared since the 
 age and that the first human settlement was at 
.


The name Kumasi derives from the 
 language, meaning 'under the Kum tree'. The word "ase" or "asi" means 'under', 'down' or 'below', and is used in many place names in 
, such as 
, 
, and 
.

Around the end of the 17th century, the Ashanti Kingdom's chief fetish Priest, 
 planted three 
 trees at different places: one at Kwaaman, ruled by the Nananom Ayokofuo; a second one at Apemso-Bankofo, ruled by Nananom Aduanafuo; and a third at a village near Fomena and Amoafo called Oboani, which was ruled by Nananom Ɛkoɔnafuo. Komfuo wanted to see which of these would become a great city for the kingdom, as he was directed by the oracles. The 
 tree at Kwaaman flourished so vigorously that the King and his people often sat underneath, and so Kwaaman became Kum-ase, meaning 'under 
.

The tree at Oboani was, however, very tiny and for no apparent reason was relatively short. According to oral tradition, this small tree produced other trees which were all small in size. The name of the village was changed to Kuma, meaning 'small 
.

The 
 tree at Apemso-Bankofo did not grow at all. After a few weeks the leaves rotted and the tree fell down; so it was said that the village's 
 tree was dead, and the village became Kum-awu, later Kumawu.


The city rose to prominence in 1695 when it became capital of the 
 due to the activities of its ruler 
.
 The ruler of Kumasi, known as the 
, also served as ruler of the empire. With their 
 over 
 the Ashanti empire became the primary state among the 
.
 Parts of the city, including the then royal residence, were burnt by the 
 in the 
 of 1874.


Lady Mary Alice Hodgson, the first English lady to visit Ashanti, wrote "The Siege of Kumasi", an account of the siege of the fort by the 
 of Ashanti and of the subsequent march to the coast.
 (She was the daughter of Hon. W. A. G. Young, C.M.G., former governor of the 
, and the wife of Sir 
, K.C.M.G., the governor of the Gold Coast in 1900.
)

In 1926, following the return of the Ashanti King 
 after a 30-year exile, Kumasi was restored as the ceremonial control over the Ashanti sub-states .The full role of king was restored by the colonial administration in 1935. The city holds an important place in the history of the Ashanti people, as legend claims that it was here Okomfo Anokye received the 
.

The city features a 
, with relatively constant temperatures throughout the course of the year. Kumasi averages around 1400 mm (55") of rain per year.

The city almost features two rainy seasons: a longer season from March through July and a shorter rainy season from September to November.

The months of February through to November is one long 
, with a relative lull in precipitation in August. Similar to the rest of West Africa, Kumasi experiences the 
 during the "low sun" months. Lasting from December to February, the harmattan is the primary source of the city's 
.

Like other parts of Ghana, Kumasi has a 
 (
 
), with a wet season and a dry season and the temperature being hot year-round. The average annual high temperature is 30.7 °C (87.3 °F), while the average annual low temperature is 21.5 °C (70.7 °F). The hottest time of year is from February to May, around the time the wet season starts. February has the highest average high at 33.5 °C (92.3 °F). April has the highest average low at 22.4 °C (72.3 °F). August has the lowest average high at 27.7 °C (81.9 °F). January has the lowest average low at 20.4 °C (68.7 °F).

Kumasi receives 1,402.4 millimetres (55.21 in) of rain over 128 precipitation days, with a distinct wet and dry season like the rest of Ghana. The dry season is short, lasting from November to February. June, the wettest month, receives 214.3 millimetres (8.44 in) of rainfall over 17 precipitation days on average. Kumasi receives 1951.8 hours of sunshine annually on average, with the sunshine being distributed fairly evenly across the year, with a noticeable dip from June to October. March receives the most sunshine, while August receives the least.

Features of the city include Fort Kumasi (built by in 1896 to replace an Asante fort and now a museum) and the Kumasi Hat Museum.
Royal Asante attractions include the Kumasi National Cultural Centre (including the 
 Jubilee Museum with Asante 
 with a reproduction of the golden stool), the 
 
, the 
's Palace (built in 1972), and the Manhyia Palace, dating from 1925, now a museum.

Among the 
, which are predominantly 
 churches and temples, are: 
, 
, 
,  (
), 
 
 (
), 
 (which was the first Pentecostal church in Ghana) 
 (
), 
, 
, 
, and 
 
 (
).
 There are also 
 mosques which include: Kumasi Central mosque, Ahmadiyya mosque, Alhaj mosque, Kaase-Nhyiaeso mosque and Rahman mosque.

The main occupations in Kumasi are professional such as 
 and manufacturing.

Kumasi has 50% of the 
 of 
, and the Kaasi 
 plays an important role in the local industry. The 
 is based in Kumasi.

 are prevalent in Kumasi and throughout the Ashanti region. 
 technology is a major energy source and contributor of 
 in region.

Much of the shopping and trading activity in the city takes place at Kumasi's 
 streets, in and around 
 and Adum. These two areas – Kejetia and Adum – have a common boundary. There is also heavy economic activities at Bantama and Asafo. Asafo in particular is the printing hub of Kumasi. Most of the printing done in Kumasi and Ashanti Region as a whole is done at Asafo. Kumasi's 
 (a sub-town in Kumasi) is also well noted for its wood carvings and arts.

There are both government-assisted primary schools in Kumasi and also private primary schools in Kumasi which educate boys and girls between the ages from 6 to 15.

There are elite all-boys and all-girls senior high schools such as 
, 
, 
 and 
 in Kumasi. There are also many elite mixed senior high schools such as 
 and 
, and a host of other public secondary schools, as well as their private counterparts in the city.

The 
, Kumasi (formerly the Kumasi College of Technology) is the biggest university in the Ashanti Region and the first biggest in Ghana followed by the 
. Former 
, 
 attended this institution.
A number of other public and private universities and tertiary institutions have since been founded in Kumasi, some of which are listed below.

formerly the University of Education, Winneba (Kumasi Campus)]]
Tanoso

Kumasi is served by the 
. As of May 2020 two airlines offered regularly scheduled flights to 
. Airlines servicing the airport included 
 and 
. In 2013, the Government of Ghana approved expansion plans to the Kumasi Airport to service international flights into the region. The renovation project will span three development stages, with all work expected to be completed by October 2022.


There is public transportation from Kumasi to major cities such as 
; 
, 
 ; 
, 
; 
; 
; 
; 
; 
; 
; 
, 
;
Public transport in the city is provided by 
, a mix of privately owned mini-buses known as 
, 
 and buses. Tro-tros are usually converted mini-buses that run regular, well-known routes. Some taxis also run regular routes, which cost more but provide for a more comfortable ride.

In 2002, the city introduced the 
, a rapid transit system for public road transport in Kumasi (
).
 This was to reduce congestion on roads and to make a larger and more organised bus routine system in the city.


In 2017, 
 introduced services in Kumasi, a year after a successful introduction in Accra.

Kumasi is served by the railway lines to 
 and Accra. The train service has been suspended for several years because of damaged track, bridges and locomotives. Currently, no trains run to and from Kumasi due to the collapse of the railway corporation. A $6 billion project to upgrade the railways was due to get underway in 2011.


As of 2011
, construction of the 
, about 25 kilometres (16 mi) away, has come to a halt.


The local 
 team, the 
 has won several national and continental trophies and awards, and serves as a rival to the Accra-based 
. Their 
, also known as 
, was built in 1959, renovated in 1978, and again in 2007 with a seating capacity of 40,000.
 It is also the home of 
, a premier division side.

There is the Royal Golf Club which has the 
 as president. Former 
 and 
 footballer 
 and professional wrestler 
 was born in Kumasi, by the real name Kofi Sarkodie-Mensah.

Kumasi has the 
 to support medical training at the university, the 
, several other 
, public clinics and hospitals. Recommended private medical facilities include Kumasi Rabito Clinic located at Ahondwo-Daban Kumasi behind the Unity Oil Filling Station.There is also the 
 hospital that serves people in the university and surrounding communities.

Kumasi has four recreational parks which are opened to the public. The list of recreational parks are 
 which is located some few meters away from 
, 
, 
 located on the same premises as the 
, and finally the 
 which was commissioned in 2015.

Kumasi is 
 with:



The 
 (
: 
), today commonly called the 
, was an 
 state that lasted between 1701 to 1901, in what is now modern-day 
.
 It expanded from the 
 to include most of Ghana as well as parts of 
 and 
.
 Due to the empire's 
, 
, architecture, 
 and 
, the Ashanti Empire has been extensively studied and has more historic records written by European, primarily British, authors than any other indigenous culture of 
.


Starting in the late 17th century, the Ashanti king 
 (
 – 1717) and his adviser 
 established the Ashanti Kingdom, with the 
 as a sole unifying symbol.
 Osei Tutu oversaw a massive Ashanti territorial expansion, building up the army by introducing new organisation and turning a disciplined royal and paramilitary army into an effective fighting machine.
 In 1701, the Ashanti army conquered 
, giving the Ashanti access to the 
 and the 
 coastal trade with Europeans, notably the 
.
 The economy of the Ashanti Empire was mainly based on the trade of gold and agricultural exports 
 as well as 
, 
 work and trade with markets further 
.
 

The army served as the effective tool to procure captives.
 The Ashanti Empire fought several wars with neighboring kingdoms and lesser organized groups such as the 
. The Ashanti defeated the 
's invasions in the first two of the four 
, killing British army general 
 and keeping his skull as a gold-rimmed drinking cup in 1824. British forces later burnt and sacked the Ashanti capital of 
, however, and after the final Ashanti defeat at the fifth Anglo-Ashanti War, the Ashanti empire became part of the Gold Coast colony on 1 January 1902. Today, the Ashanti Kingdom survives as a constitutionally protected, sub-national 
 in union with the Republic of Ghana. The current king of the Ashanti Kingdom is 
. The Ashanti Kingdom is the home to 
, Ghana's only natural lake. The state's current economic revenue is derived mainly from trading in 
, 
, 
 and 
.


The name 
 means "because of war". The word derives from the 
 words 
 meaning "war" and 
 meaning "because of". This name comes from the Asante's origin as a kingdom created to fight the 
 kingdom.


The variant name "Ashanti" comes from British reports transcribing "Asante" as the British heard it pronounced, 
. The hyphenation was subsequently dropped and the name 
 remained, with various spellings including 
 common into the early 20th century.

Between the 10th and 12th centuries AD, the ethnic 
 migrated into the forest belt of Southern Ghana and established several Akan states: 

Before the Ashanti Kingdom had contact with Europeans, it had a flourishing trade with other African states due to the Ashanti 
 wealth. Trade with European states began after contact with the 
 in the 15th century AD.
 When the 
 in the 
 started to play out, the Ashanti Kingdom rose to prominence as the major player in the gold trade.
 At the height of the Ashanti Kingdom, the Ashanti people became wealthy through the trading of gold mined from their territory.


Ashanti political organization was originally centred on 
 headed by a 
 or O
.
 One particular clan, the 
, settled in the Ashanti's sub-tropical forest region, establishing a centre at 
.
 The Ashanti became tributaries of another Akan state, 
 but in the mid-17th century the Oyoko under Chief Oti Akenten started consolidating the Ashanti clans into a loose 
 against the Denkyira.



The introduction of the 
 (
) was a means of centralization under Osei Tutu. According to legend, a meeting of all the clan heads of each of the Ashanti settlements was called just prior to declaring independence from Denkyira. Those included members from Nsuta, Mampong, Dwaben, Bekwai and Kokofu.
 In this meeting the Golden Stool was commanded down from the heavens by Okomfo Anokye, chief-priest or sage advisor to 
 Osei Tutu I and floated down from the heavens into the lap of Osei Tutu I. Okomfo 
 declared the stool to be symbolic of the new Ashanti Union (
), and allegiance was sworn to the stool and to Osei Tutu as the 
. The newly declared Ashanti union subsequently waged war against and defeated Denkyira.
 The stool remains sacred to the Ashanti as it is believed to contain the 
 — spirit or soul of the Ashanti people.
In the 1670s the head of the 
 clan, 
, began another rapid consolidation of 
 via diplomacy and warfare.
 King Osei Kofu Tutu I and his chief advisor, Okomfo Kwame Frimpong 
 led a coalition of influential Ashanti city-states against their mutual oppressor, the 
 who held the Ashanti Kingdom in its thrall. The Ashanti Kingdom utterly defeated them at the 
, proclaiming its independence in 1701. Subsequently, through hard line force of arms and savoir-faire diplomacy, the duo induced the leaders of the other Ashanti city-states to declare allegiance and adherence to Kumasi, the Ashanti capital. From the beginning, King Osei Tutu and priest 
 followed an expansionist and an imperialistic provincial foreign policy. According to folklore, Okomfo Anokye is believed to have visited 
.


Realizing the strengths of a loose confederation of Akan states, Osei Tutu strengthened centralization of the surrounding Akan groups and expanded the powers of the judiciary system within the centralized government. This loose confederation of small city-states grew into a kingdom and eventually an empire looking to expand its borders. Newly conquered areas had the option of joining the empire or becoming tributary states.
 
, Osei Tutu's successor, extended the borders, embracing much of Ghana's territory.


European contact with the Ashanti on the 
 coast region of Africa began in the 15th century. This led to trade in 
, 
, 
, and other goods with the 
.
 On May 15, 1817, the Englishman 
 entered Kumasi. He remained there for several months, was impressed, and on his return to England wrote a book, 
.
  His praise of the kingdom was disbelieved as it contradicted prevailing prejudices. 
, the first British consul in Kumasi, arrived on March 23, 1820. Both Bowdich and Dupuis secured a treaty with the Asantehene. But, the governor, Hope Smith, did not meet Ashanti expectations.


From 1824 till 1899 there were five 
 between the Ashanti Empire and Great Britain and its allies. The British lost or negotiated truces in several of these wars, with the final war resulting in British burning of 
 and official occupation of the Ashanti Empire in 1900. The wars were mainly due to Ashanti attempts to establish a stronghold over the coastal areas of present-day Ghana. Coastal peoples such as the 
 and the 
 came to rely on British protection against Ashanti incursions.

In December 1895, the British left 
 with an expeditionary force to start what is known as the Third Anglo-Ashanti War, see below. The Asantehene directed the Ashanti to not resist the British advance, as he feared reprisals from Britain if the expedition turned violent. Shortly thereafter, Governor 
 arrived in Kumasi as well.


Britain 
 the territories of the Ashanti and the Fanti and constituted the 
 on 26 September 1901.
 Asantehene Agyeman Prempeh was deposed and arrested, and he and other Ashanti leaders were sent into exile in the 
. The Asante Union was dissolved
. A 
 was permanently placed in the city of Kumasi, and soon after a British fort was built there
.

As a final measure of resistance, the remaining Asante court not exiled to the Seychelles mounted an offensive against the British Residents at the Kumasi Fort. The resistance was led by Asante queen 
, Queen-Mother of Ejisu. From March 28 to late September 1900, the Asante and British were engaged in what would become known as the 
. In the end, the British were victorious; they exiled Asantewaa and other Asante leaders to the Seychelles to join Asante King Prempeh I.

In January 1902, Britain finally designated the Ashanti Kingdom as a 
. the Ashanti Kingdom was restored to self-rule on 31 January 1935. Asante King Prempeh II was restored in 1957, and the Ashanti Kingdom entered a 
 with Ghana on independence from the United Kingdom.




The Ashanti state was a centralized state made up of a hierarchy of heads starting from the "
 Panyin" who was head of a family or lineage. The family was the basic political unit in the empire. The family or lineage followed the village organization which was headed by the 
. All villages were then grouped together to form divisions headed by a divisional head called 
. The various divisions were politically grouped to form a state which was headed by an 
 or 
. Finally, all Ashanti states formed the Ashanti Empire with the Asantehene as their king.


The Ashanti government was built upon a sophisticated 
 in Kumasi, with separate 
 to handle the state's affairs.
 Of particular note was Ashanti's Foreign Office based in Kumasi; despite its small size, it allowed the state to pursue complex negotiations with foreign powers. The Office was divided into departments to handle relations separately with the 
, 
, 
, and 
. Scholars of Ashanti history, such as 
 and 
, disagree over the power of this sophisticated bureaucracy in comparison to the Asantehene, but agree that it was a sign of a highly developed government with a complex system of 
.

At the top of Ashanti's power structure sat the 
, the King of Ashanti. Each Asantahene was enthroned on the sacred Golden Stool, the Sika 'dwa, an object that came to symbolise the very power of the King. Osei Kwadwo (1764–1777) began the 
 system of appointing central officials according to their ability, rather than their birth.


As King, the 
 held immense power in Ashanti, but did not enjoy 
.
 He was obliged to share considerable legislative and executive powers with Ashanti's sophisticated bureaucracy. But the 
 was the only person in Ashanti permitted to invoke the 
 in cases of crime. During wartime, the King acted as Supreme Commander of the 
, although during the 19th century, the fighting was increasingly handled by the Ministry of War in Kumasi. Each member of the confederacy was also obliged to send annual tribute to Kumasi.

The 
 (King of all Ashanti) reigned over all and was King of the division of Kumasi, the nation's capital, and the Ashanti Empire. He was elected in the same manner as all other chiefs. In this hierarchical structure, every chief or King swore fealty to the one above him—from village and subdivision, to division, to the chief of Kumasi, and finally the 
 swore fealty to the 
.


The 
 circumscribed the power of the 
, and the chiefs of other divisions considerably checked the power of the King. This in practical effect created a system of checks and balances. As the symbol of the nation, the 
 received significant deference ritually, for the context was religious in that he was a symbol of the people in the flesh: the living, dead or yet to be born. When the king committed an act not approved of by the counsel of elders or the people, he could possibly be 
, and demoted to a commoner.


The existence of 
 organizations and the 
 of elders is evidence of an 
 tendency in Ashanti political life. Though older men tended to 
 political power, Ashanti instituted an organization of young men, the 
, that tended to 
 and 
 the political process in the empire. The council of elders undertook actions only after consulting a representative of the 
. Their views were taken seriously as they participated in decision-making in the empire.


The current residence of the Asantehene is the 
 built in 1925 by the British and presented to the 
 as a present upon his return from exile. 


The original palace of the Asantehene in Kumasi was burned down by the British in 1875. From European accounts, the edifice was massive and ornately built. In 1819, English traveler and author, 
 described the palace as 
 ...an immense building of a variety of oblong courts and regular squares [with] 
 exuberantly adorned with bold fan and trellis work of Egyptian character. They have a suite of rooms over them, with small windows of wooden lattice, of intricate but regular carved work, and some have frames cased with thin gold. The squares have a large apartment on each side, open in front, with two supporting pillars, which break the view and give it all the appearance of the proscenium or front of the stage of the older Italian theaters. They are lofty and regular, and the cornices of a very bold cane-work in alto-relievo. A drop-curtain of curiously plaited cane is suspended in front, and in each, we observed chairs and stools embossed with gold, and beds of silk, with scattered regalia.
 
 also described his visit to the Ashanti Royal Palace of Kumasi in 1874:
“We went to the king’s palace, which consists of many courtyards, each surrounded with alcoves and verandahs, and having two gates or doors, so that each yard was a thoroughfare . . . But the part of the palace fronting the street was a stone house, Moorish in its style . . . with a flat roof and a parapet, and suites of apartments on the first floor. It was built by Fanti masons many years ago. The rooms upstairs remind me of Wardour Street. Each was a perfect Old Curiosity Shop. Books in many languages, Bohemian glass, clocks, silver plate, old furniture, Persian rugs, Kidderminster carpets, pictures and engravings, numberless chests and coffers. A sword bearing the inscription From Queen Victoria to the King of Ashantee. A copy of the Times, 17 October 1843. With these were many specimens of Moorish and Ashanti handicraft.”
Odumata's Sleeping Room (1819).

Piazza in the Palace (1819).

Adum Street (1819).

This institution assisted the Asantehene and served as an advisory body to the king. The council was made up of 
 or paramount chiefs who were leaders of the various Ashanti states. The council also included other provincial chiefs. By law the Asantehene never ignored the decisions of the Asanteman council. Doing so could get him  de-stooled from the throne.


The Ashanti Empire was made up of metropolitan and provincial states. The metropolitan states were made up of Ashanti citizens known as 
. The provincial states were other kingdoms absorbed into the empire. Every metropolitan Ashanti state was headed by the 
 or paramount chief. Each of these paramount chiefs served as principal rulers of their own states, where they exerted executive, legislative and judicial powers.


The 
 were divisional chiefs under the Amanhene. Their major function was to advise the Amanhene. The divisional chiefs were the highest order in various Ashanti state divisions. The divisions were made up of various villages put together. Examples of divisional chiefs included Krontihene, Nifahene, Benkumhene, Adontenhene and Kyidomhene.


Each village in Asante had a chief called Odikro who was the owner of the village. The Odikro was responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He also served as a medium between the people of his jurisdiction, the ancestor and the gods. As the head of the village, the Odikro presided over the village council.


The queen or 
 was an important figure in Ashanti political systems. She was the most powerful female in the Empire. She had the prerogative of being consulted in the process of installing a chief or the king, as she played a major role in the nomination and selection. She settled disputes involving women and was involved in decision-making alongside the Council of elders and chiefs.
 Not only did she participate in the judicial and legislative processes, but also in the making and unmaking of war, and the distribution of land.


Successful entrepreneurs who accumulated large wealth and men as well as distinguished themselves through heroic deeds were awarded social and political recognition by being called "Abirempon" or "Obirempon" which means big men. By the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries AD, the appellation "Abirempon" had formalized and politicized to embrace those who conducted trade from which the whole state benefited. The state rewarded entrepreneurs who attained such accomplishments with Mena (elephant tail) which was the "heraldic badge" 
 
s had a fair amount of legislative power in their regions, more than the local nobles of Dahomey but less than the regional governors of the Oyo Empire. In addition to handling the region's administrative and economic matters, the 
 also acted as the Supreme Judge of their jurisdiction, presiding over court cases.

The Kotoko was a government council in the Ashanti government. 
Politically, the kotoko council served as the counterweight to the king's council of elders and basically embodied the aristocratic party in the government. The council formed the Legislature of Ashanti governmental system.
 It was made up of the Asantehene, the Queen mother as well as the state chiefs and their ministers.

The 
 of Kings and the Asantehene (
 ) himself followed a pattern. The senior female of the kingly lineage nominated the eligible males. This senior female then consulted the elders, male and female, of that line. The final candidate is then selected. That nomination was sent to a council of elders, who represented other lineages in the 
 or 
.


The Elders then presented the nomination to the assembled people. If the assembled 
 disapproved of the nominee, the process was restarted.
 Chosen, the new Kings were enstooled by the Elders, who admonished him with expectations. The chosen Kings swore a solemn oath to the 
 and to his ancestors to fulfill his duties honorably in which he 
 himself and his life for the betterment of the state.


This elected and enstooled King enjoyed a great majestic 
 with much spectacle and celebration. He reigned with much 
 power, including the ability to make judgments of life and death on his subjects. However, he did not enjoy 
. Upon the stool, the King was sacred. He served as the holy intermediary between the people and the ancestors. His powers theoretically were more apparent than real and hinged on his attention to the advice and decisions of the Council of Elders.


Kings of the Ashanti Empire who violated any of the 
 taken during his or her enstoolment, were destooled by Kingmakers.
 For instance, if a king punished citizens arbitrarily or was exposed as corrupt, he would be destooled. Destoolment entailed kingmakers removing the sandals of the king and bumping his buttocks on the ground three times. Once destooled from office, his sanctity and thus reverence were lost, as he could not exercise any of the powers he had as king; this includes Chief administrator, Judge, and Military Commander. The now previous king was dispossessed of the Stool, swords and other 
 which symbolized his office and authority. 
He also lost his position as custodian of the land. However, even if destooled from office, the king remained a member of the royal family from which he was elected.
 An impeachment occurred during the reign of 
, caused by a 
.


 was responsible for creating the 
 which served as the  
 constitution of the Ashanti Empire.


The Ashanti state, in effect, was a 
. It invokes religious, rather than 
-legal postulates. What the modern state views as 
, Ashanti view practically as 
. Antisocial acts disrespect the ancestors, and are only secondarily harmful to the 
. If the chief or 
 fails to punish such acts, he invokes the anger of the ancestors and the gods, and is therefore in danger of 
. The penalty for some crimes (sins) is death, but this is seldom imposed; a more common penalty is 
 or 
.
 The King typically exacts or 
 all 
. These commuted sentences by King and chiefs sometimes occur by 
 or 
; they are regulated in such a way that they should not be mistaken for 
, but are considered as 
 to the state, which for the most part welcomes 
 and 
. 
 tend to be far more frequent than 
.


Ashanti are repulsed by 
, and 
 is considered murder. They decapitate those who commit suicide, the conventional punishment for murder. The suicide thus had contempt for the court, for only the King may kill an Ashanti.


In a 
 
, intent must be established. If the 
 is accidental, the murderer pays compensation to the lineage of the deceased. The 
 cannot be executed because of the absence of responsible intent – except for murder or cursing the King; in the case of cursing the king, drunkenness is a valid defense. 
 include murder, 
 within the female or male line, and intercourse with a 
 woman, 
 of a married woman, and 
 with any of the wives of a chief or the King. 
 or insults of a chief or the 
 or the King also carried 
.


Cursing the King, calling down powers to harm the King, is considered an unspeakable act and carries the weight of 
. One who invokes another to commit such an act must pay a heavy indemnity. Practitioners of harmful (evil) forms of 
 and witchcraft receive death but not by decapitation, for their blood must not be shed. They receive execution by strangling, burning, or drowning.


Ordinarily, families or lineages settle disputes between individuals. Nevertheless, such disputes can be brought to 
 before a chief by uttering the 
 oath of a chief or the King. In the end, the 
 is the sentencing court, for only the King can order the 
. Before the Council of Elders and the King's Court, the litigants orate comprehensively. Anyone present can cross-examine the defendant or the accuser, and if the proceedings do not lead to a 
, a special witness is called to provide additional 
. If there is only one witness, their sworn oath assures the truth is told. Moreover, that he favours or is hostile to either litigant is unthinkable. Cases with no witness, like sorcery or adultery are settled by ordeals, like drinking 
.


 establishes the Ashanti 
, and it provides the principal foundation for 
 sanctions. The link between mother and child centres the entire network, which includes ancestors and fellow men as well. Its 
 emphasizes the Ashanti conception of rectitude and good 
, which favours harmony among the people. The rules were made by 
 (Supreme 
) and the ancestors, and one must behave accordingly.


The Ashanti Empire was one of a series of states along the coast including Dahomey, 
, and 
. The Ashanti had mountains and large 
 surpluses.
 The southern part of the Ashanti Empire was covered with moist semi-
 whilst the 
 covered the northern part of the state. The Guinea Savanna consists of short deciduous and fire resistant trees. 
 also occur along the 
 and streams of the savanna zone. Soils in Ashanti were mainly of two types; 
 ochrosols in the southern part of Ashanti whilst the 
 ochrosols were confined to northern part of the empire.


The predominant 
 or food rich wildlife and animal species encountered in the Ashanti Empire were the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and the 
 which became the national emblem of the state, as well as about thirty multipurpose 
 species of trees and 
 and over thirty-five ornamental plants which beautified the environs of Ashanti. These tree/shrub-crop-animal (hen/fish) components were intensively integrated spatially and/or sequentially on the same land unit of individual Ashanti houses.


Between 1700 and 1715, Osei Tutu I conquered the neighboring states of 
, 
 and Aowin. 
 who succeeded Osei Tutu, led the integration of Akan states such as 
, 
 and 
 into Ashanti after embarking on wars of conquest between 1720 to 1750. After the conquest of the Akyem in 1742, the Ashanti exerted power unto the coast. From 1730 to 1770, the Ashanti Empire expanded north into the Savannah states of 
, 
 and Krakye.
 
By 1816, the Ashanti had absorbed coastal states such as the 
.
 The expansion into Dagbon is refuted by some researchers such as A.A. Lliasu. Scholar Karl J. Haas argues that "claims of Asante dominance over Dagbon in the
precolonial era have been greatly exagged."


The lands within the Ashanti Kingdom were also rich in river-
, 
 and 
, and the Ashanti were soon trading with the 
 at coastal fort 
, later 
,and with the 
 states.


The Ashanti prepared the fields by burning before the onset of the rainy season and cultivated with an iron 
. Fields are left fallow for a couple years, usually after two to four years of cultivation. Plants cultivated include 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and many 
. Manioc and corn are New World transplants introduced during the 
. Many of these 
 crops could be harvested twice a year and the 
 (manioc), after a two-year growth, provides a starchy root.



The Ashanti transformed 
, maize and millet into 
, a favourite drink; and made use of the oil from palm for many culinary and domestic uses.
 
The Ashanti invented the 
, an Asante 
, and they also invented the 
. They drummed messages to distances of over 300 kilometres (200 mi), as rapidly as a 
. 
 (Twi) and 
, the language of the 
 is tonal and more meaning is generated by tone. The drums reproduced these tones, punctuations, and the accents of a phrase so that the cultivated ear heard the entirety of the phrase itself.

The Ashanti readily heard and understood the phrases produced by these "talking drums". Standard phrases called for meetings of the chiefs or to arms, warned of danger, and broadcast announcements of the death of important figures. Some drums were used for 
 and ceremonial presentations.


Although pre-literate, the Ashanti recruited literate individuals into its government to increase the efficiency of the state's diplomacy. Some written records were also kept.
 Historian Adjaye, gives estimates based on surviving letters by the Ashanti that documents from the Ashanti government "could have exceeded several thousands."
 Writing was also used in record keeping during 
. Bowdich documented in the early nineteenth century about the "trial of Apea Nyano" on 8 July 1817 where he states that "the 
 secretaries were there to take notes of the transactions of the day." Wilks adds that such transcripts have not survived today.


The population history of the Ashanti Kingdom was one of slow centralization. In the early 19th century the Asantehene used the annual tribute to set up a permanent standing army armed with 
, which allowed much closer control of the Ashanti Kingdom. The Ashanti Kingdom was one of the most centralised states in sub-Saharan Africa. Osei Tutu and his successors oversaw a policy of political and cultural unification and the union had reached its full extent by 1750. It remained an alliance of several large city-states which acknowledged the sovereignty of the ruler of Kumasi and the Ashanti Kingdom, known as the Asantehene. The Ashanti Kingdom had dense populations, allowing the creation of substantial 
.
 The Ashanti controlled over 250,000 square kilometers while ruling approximately 3 million people.


The Ashanti traditional buildings are the only remnants of Ashanti architecture. Construction and design consisted of a timber framework filled up with clay and 
 with sheaves of leaves. The surviving designated sites are 
, but there have been many other buildings in the past with the same architectural style.
 These buildings served as 
 and 
 as well as houses for the affluent.
 The Ashanti Empire also built 
 which housed the tombs of several Ashanti leaders.
Generally, houses whether designed for human habitation or for the 
, consisted of four separate rectangular single-room buildings set around an open 
; the inner corners of adjacent buildings were linked by means of splayed screen walls, whose sides and  angles could be adapted to allow for any inaccuracy in the initial layout. Typically, three of the buildings were completely open to the courtyard, while the fourth was partially enclosed, either by the door and windows, or by open-work  screens flanking an opening.
 

Infrastructure such as 
 and 
 throughout the empire was maintained via a network of well-kept 
 from the Ashanti mainland to the 
 and other trade cities.
 English visitors to Kumasi in the 19th century, noted the division of the capital into 77 wards with 77 main streets; one of which was 100 yards wide. Many houses especially those near the king's stone palace were two story buildings embodied with indoor 
 in the form of toilets that were flushed with gallons of boiling water.
 Bowdich revealed in his 1817 account that all streets of Kumasi 
.
 Stationed at various points of Ashanti roads were the 
 or road wardens who served as the highway police; checking the movement of traders and strangers on all roads. They were also responsible for scouting and were charged with the collection of 
 from traders.
 The Ashanti Empire also built 
 across water bodies for transport. Asantehene 
 ordered his engineers to build proper bridges above streams in the Metropolitan cities of Ashanti. 
, who visited the empire in the 19th century, described the construction as:

Some stout, forked sticks or posts are driven in the centre of the stream at convenient distances, across which are placed some strong beams, fastened to the posts with withes, from the numerous climbing plants on every hand. On these bearers are placed long stout poles which are covered with earth from fourth to six inches thick....
The 
 inherited his position from his queen mother, and he was assisted at the capital, Kumasi, by a civil service of men talented in 
, 
, and the 
, with a head called the 
.
 Men from the 
, 
, and 
 were employed in the Ashanti empire 
; all of whom were appointed by the 
.
 In the metropolitan areas of Ashanti, several 
 were responsible for maintaining law and order. In Kumasi, a uniformed police, who were distinguished by their long hair, maintained order by ensuring no one else entered and left the city without permission from the government.
 The 
 or 
 were used as the empire's 
 and 
 to the Asantehene, as sources of 
, and to suppress rebellion.
  For most of the 19th century and into the 20th century, the Ashanti 
 remained powerful.


The Ashanti armies served the empire well, supporting its long period of expansion and subsequent resistance to European colonization. 
Armament was primarily with firearms, but some historians hold that indigenous organization and leadership probably played a more crucial role in Ashanti successes.
 These are, perhaps, more significant when considering that the Ashanti had numerous troops from conquered or incorporated peoples, and faced a number of revolts and rebellions from these peoples over its long history. The political genius of the symbolic "golden stool" and the fusing effect of a national army however, provided the unity needed to keep the empire viable. Total potential strength was some 80,000 to 200,000, making the Ashanti army bigger than the well known Zulu, and comparable to possibly Africa's largest – the legions of Ethiopia.
 The Ashanti army was described as a fiercely organized one whose king could "bring 200,000 men into the field and whose warriors were evidently not cowed by 
 and 7-pounder guns"

While actual forces deployed in the field were less than 
 strength, tens of thousands of soldiers were usually available to serve the needs of the empire. Mobilization depended on small cadres of regulars, who guided and directed levees and contingents called up from provincial governors.

Organization was structured around an advance guard, main body, rear guard and two right and left wing flanking elements. This provided flexibility in the forest country the Ashanti armies typically operated in. Horses were known to survive in Kumasi but because they could not survive in the tsetse fly-infested forest zone in the south, there was no cavalry. Ashanti high ranking officers rode horses with the hauteur of European officers but they did not ride to battle.
 The approach to the battlefield was typically via converging columns, and tactics included ambushes and extensive maneuvers on the wings. Unique among African armies, the Ashanti deployed medical units to support their fighters. This force was to expand the empire substantially and continually for over a century, and defeated the British in several encounters.


Brass barrel blunderbuss were produced in some states in the Gold Coast including the Ashanti Empire around the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Various accounts indicate that Asante blacksmiths were not only able to repair firearms, but that barrels, locks and stocks were on occasion remade.


From 1806 until 1896, the Ashanti state was in a perpetual state of war involving expansion or defense of its domain. Ashanti exploits against other African forces made it the paramount power in the region. Its impressive performance against the British also earned it the respect of European powers.

In 1806, the Ashanti pursued two rebel leaders through Fante territory to the coast. The British refusal to surrender the rebels led to an Ashanti attack. This was devastating enough that the British handed over a rebel; the other escaped.
 In 1807 disputes with the 
 led to the 
, in which the Ashanti were victorious under Asantehene Osei Bonsu ("Bonsu, the whale").

In the 1811 
, a coalition of Asante and Ga fought against an alliance of Fante, Akwapim and Akim states.  The Asante war machine was successful in defeating the alliance in open combat pushing their enemies towards the  Akwapim hills. Ashanti however abandoned their campaign of pursuit after capturing a British fort and establishing their presence and authority on the coast.

In 1814 the Ashanti launched an invasion of the Gold Coast, largely to gain access to European traders. In the 
, the empire faced the Akim–Akwapim alliance. After several battles, the out numbered Akim–Akwapim alliance were defeated and became tributories to the Ashantis. The Ashanti was established from the midlands down to the coast.

The first of the 
 occurred in 1823. In these conflicts, the Ashanti empire faced off, with varying degrees of success, against the British Empire residing on the coast. The root of the conflict traces back to 1823 when Sir 
, resisting all overtures by the Ashanti to negotiate, led an invading force.  The Ashanti defeated this, killed MacCarthy, took his head for a trophy and swept on to the coast. However, disease forced them back. The Ashanti were so successful in subsequent fighting that in 1826 they again moved on the coast. The Ashanti were stopped about 15 kilometres (10 mi) north of Accra by a British led force. They fought against superior numbers of British allied forces, including Denkyirans until the novelty of British rockets caused the Ashanti army to flee.
 In 1831, a treaty led to 30 years of peace, with the 
 accepted as the border.

With the exception of a few Ashanti light skirmishes across the Pra in 1853 and 1854, the peace between the Ashanti  and British Empire had remained unbroken for over 30 years. Then, in 1863, a large Ashanti delegation crossed the river pursuing a fugitive, Kwesi Gyana. There was fighting, casualties on both sides, but the governor's request for troops from England was declined and sickness forced the withdrawal of his West Indian troops. The war ended in 1864 as a stalemate with both sides losing more men to sickness than any other factor.

In 1869 a European missionary family was taken to Kumasi. They were hospitably welcomed and were used as an excuse for war in 1873. Also, Britain took control of Ashanti land claimed by the Dutch. The Ashanti invaded the new British protectorate. 
 and his famous 
 were sent against the Ashanti. This was a modern war, replete with press coverage (including by the renowned reporter 
) and printed precise military and medical instructions to the troops.
 The British government refused appeals to interfere with British armaments manufacturers who were unrestrained in selling to both sides.


All Ashanti attempts at negotiations were disregarded. Wolseley took 2,500 British troops and several thousand West Indian and African troops to Kumasi. It arrived in Kumasi in January 1896 along a route cleared by an advance contingent under the command of 
.
 The capital was briefly occupied. The British were impressed by the size of the palace and the scope of its contents, including "rows of books in many languages."
 The Ashanti had abandoned the capital after a bloody war. The British burned it.


The British and their allies suffered considerable casualties in the war losing numerous soldiers and high ranking army officers.
 but in the end the firepower was too much to overcome for the Ashanti.  The Asantehene (the king of the Ashanti) signed a British treaty in July 1874 to end the war.

In 1895, the Ashanti turned down an unofficial offer to become a British protectorate.

The Ashanti wanting to keep French and European colonial forces out of the territory (and its gold), the British were anxious to conquer the Ashanti once and for all. Despite being in talks with the state about making it a British protectorate, Britain began the Fourth Anglo-Ashanti War in 1895 on the pretext of failure to pay the fines levied on the Ashanti monarch after the 1874 war. The British were victorious and the Ashanti was forced to sign a treaty.

Standing among families was largely political. The royal family typically topped the hierarchy, followed by the families of the 
 of territorial divisions. In each 
, a particular female line provides the chief. A committee of several men eligible for the post elects the chief. The typical Ashanti family was 
 and 
.
 A mother's brother was the legal guardian of her children. The father on the other hand had fewer legal responsibilities for his children with the exception of ensuring their well-being. Women also had the right to initiate 
 whiles the husband had some legal rights over his wife such as the right to cut off her nose for adultery.


Prominent people wore silk. The ordinary Ashanti wore cotton whiles slaves dressed in black cloth. Garments signalled the rank of the wearer in society and its colour expressed different meanings. White was worn by ordinary people after winning a court case. Dark colours were worn for funerals or mourning.
 Laws existed to restrict certain Kente designs to the nobility. Some cotton or silk patterns on the Kente were designed solely for the king and could only be worn with his permission.


Education in the Ashanti Kingdom was conducted by Asante and imported scholars and Ashanti people would often attend schools in Europe for their 
.


Tolerant parents are typical among the Ashanti. Childhood is considered a happy time and children cannot be responsible for their actions. The child is not responsible for their actions until after 
. A child is harmless and there is no worry for the control of their 
, the original purpose of all 
, so the ritual funerals typically given to the deceased Ashanti are not as lavish for the children.


The Ashanti adored twins when they were born within the 
 because they were seen as a sign of impending fortune. Ordinarily, boy twins joined the army and twin girls potential wives of the King. If the twins are a boy and girl, no particular career awaits them. Women who bear 
 are greatly honored because three is regarded as a lucky number. Special 
 ensue for the third, sixth, and ninth child. The fifth child (unlucky five) can expect misfortune. Families with many children are well respected and barren women scoffed at.


The Ashanti used 
 in their daily society. The symbols were used as a form of decoration, logos, arts, sculpture and pottery.

The Ashanti held 
 only for females. Fathers instruct their sons without public observance. The privacy of boys was respected in the Ashanti kingdom. As 
 approaches, a girl goes to her mother's house. When the girl's menstruation is disclosed, the mother announces the good news in the village beating an iron hoe with a stone. Old women come out and sing 
 (menstrual) songs.


Menstruating women suffered numerous restrictions. The Ashanti viewed them as ritually unclean. They did not cook for men, nor did they eat any food cooked for a man. If a menstruating woman entered the ancestral stool (shrine) house, she was arrested, and the punishment could result in death. If this punishment is not exacted, the Ashanti believe, the ghost of the 
 would strangle the 
. Menstruating women lived in special houses during their periods as they were forbidden to cross the threshold of men's houses. They swore no 
 and no oaths were sworn for or against them. They did not participate in any of the 
 observances and did not visit any 
 places.


Sickness and death were major events in the 
. The ordinary 
 divined the 
 cause of the illness and treated it with 
.


People loathed being alone for long without someone available to perform this rite before the sick collapsed. The family dressed the deceased in their best clothes, and adorned them with packets of gold dust (money for the after-life), ornaments, and food for the journey "up the hill". The body was normally buried within 24 hours. Until that time the funeral party engage in dancing, drumming, shooting of guns, all accompanied by the wailing of relatives. This was done because the Ashanti typically believed that death was not something to be sad about, but rather a part of life. As the Ashanti believed in an after-life, families felt they would be reunited with their ancestors upon death. Funeral rites for the death of a king involved the whole kingdom and were a much more elaborate affair.


The greatest and most frequent 
 of the Ashanti recalled the spirits of departed rulers with an offering of food and drink, asking their favour for the common good, called the 
. The day before the 
, 
 broadcast the approaching ceremonies. The stool treasurer gathers sheep and liquor that will be offered. The chief priest officiates the 
 in the stool house where the ancestors came. The 
 offers each food and a beverage. The public ceremony occurs outdoors, where all the people joined the dancing. Minstrels chant ritual phrases; the talking drums extol the chief and the ancestors in traditional phrases. The 
, the other large ceremony, occurs in September and typically lasted for a week or two. It is a time of cleansing of sin from society the defilement, and for the purification of 
 of ancestors and the gods. After the 
 and feast of a black 
—of which both the living and the dead share—a new year begins in which all are clean, strong, and healthy.


Slavery was historically a tradition in the Ashanti Empire, with slaves typically taken as captives from enemies in warfare. The Ashanti Empire was the largest slaveowning and slave trading state in the territory of today's Ghana during the 
.
 The welfare of their slaves varied from being able to acquire wealth and intermarry with the master's family to being 
 in funeral ceremonies. The Ashanti believed that slaves would follow their masters into the afterlife. Slaves could sometimes own other slaves, and could also request a new master if the slave believed he or she was being severely mistreated.


The modern-day Ashanti claim that slaves were seldom abused,
 and that a person who abused a slave was held in high contempt by 
. They defend the "humanity" of Ashanti slavery by noting that those slaves were allowed to marry.
 If a master found a female slave desirable, he might marry her. He preferred such an arrangement to that of a free woman in a conventional marriage, because marriage to an enslaved woman allowed the children to inherit some of the father's 
 and status

This favoured arrangement occurred primarily because of what some men considered their conflict with the 
 system. Under this kinship system, children were considered born into the mother's clan and took their status from her family.
 Generally her eldest brother served as mentor to her children, particularly for the boys. She was protected by her family.
 Some Ashanti men felt more comfortable taking a slave girl or pawn wife in marriage, as she would have no 
 (older male grandfather, father, uncle or brother) to intercede on her behalf when the couple argued. With an enslaved wife, the master and husband had total control of their children, as she had no kin in the community.


The Ashanti Empire has been depicted in a number of different works of 
, detailing the structure of the empire

The Ashanti Empire has been depicted in some historical 
, along with being characters in video games with origins from the area




				Pages for logged out editors 

			




The 
 (
 or 
), commonly known as the 
 (
 or 
) or 
, is a country 
 in 
. It consists of 50 
, a 
, five major 
, nine 
,
 and 326 
. It is the world's 
 by both land and total area.
 The United States shares land borders 
 to its north and 
 to its south. It has maritime borders with the 
, 
, 
, and other nations.
 With a population of over 333 million,
 it is the 
 country in the 
 and the 
 in the world. The national capital is 
 and the 
 city and 
 is 
.

 
 to the North American mainland at least 12,000 years ago, and advanced cultures began to appear later on. These advanced cultures had almost completely declined by the time 
 arrived in North America and began to 
. The United States emerged from the 
 when disputes with the 
 over taxation and 
 led to the 
 (1765–1791), which established the nation's independence. In the late 18th century, the U.S. began expanding across North America, gradually 
, sometimes through war, frequently 
, and admitting new states. By 1848, the United States spanned the 
 from east to west. The controversy surrounding the practice of 
 culminated in the secession of the 
, which fought the remaining states of the 
 during the 
 (1861–1865). With the Union's victory and preservation, slavery was abolished by the 
.

By 1900, the United States had become the 
, and the 
 and 
 established the country as a 
. After Japan's 
 in 1941, the U.S. entered 
 on the 
. The aftermath of the war left the United States and the 
 as the world's two 
. During the 
, both countries engaged in a struggle for ideological dominance but avoided direct military conflict. They also competed in the 
, which culminated in the 
 that first landed humans on the Moon. Simultaneously, the 
 (1954–1968) led to legislation abolishing state and local 
 and other codified racial discrimination against 
. The Soviet Union's dissolution in 1991 ended the Cold War, leaving the United States as the world's sole superpower. In 2001, following the 
, the United States launched the "
", which included the 
 (2001–2021) and the 
 (2003–2011).

The United States is a 
 with 
, including a 
. It is a 
 and 
; it 
 in international measures of 
, 
, 
 and 
, 
, and 
; and it has low levels of 
. It has high levels of 
 and 
, allows 
, and lacks 
. As a 
 of 
 and 
, the U.S. has been shaped by 
.

The United States is a highly 
, and 
 accounts for approximately a quarter of global 
 and is the world's 
 by GDP at market exchange rates. By value, the United States is the world's 
 importer and 
 exporter. Although it accounts for just over 4.2% of the world's total population, the U.S. holds 
 of the total wealth in the world, the largest share held by any country. The United States is a founding member of the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and is a 
 of the 
. The country makes up more than a third of 
 and is the 
 in the world and a leading 
, cultural, and 
 force.

The first known use of the name "
" dates to 1507, when it appeared on 
 produced by the German cartographer 
 in 
, 
 (now northeastern France). On his map, the name is shown in large letters on what would now be considered 
, honoring 
. The Italian explorer was the first to postulate that the 
 did not represent Asia's eastern limit but were part of a previously unknown landmass.
 In 1538, the Flemish cartographer 
 used the name "America" to refer to the entire 
.


The first documentary evidence of the phrase "United States of America" dates back to a letter from January 2, 1776, written by 
 to 
, George Washington's 
. Moylan expressed his wish to go "with full and ample powers from the United States of America to Spain" to seek assistance in the revolutionary war effort.
 The first known publication of the phrase "United States of America" was in an anonymous essay in 
 newspaper in 
, on April 6, 1776.


The second draft of the 
 and 
, prepared by 
 and completed no later than June 17, 1776, declared "The name of this Confederation shall be the 'United States of America'."
 The final version of the Articles, sent to the states for ratification in late 1777, stated that "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America'."
 In June 1776, 
 wrote the phrase "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA" in all capitalized letters in the headline of his "original Rough draught" of the 
.
 This draft of the document did not surface until June 21, 1776, and it is unclear whether it was written before or after Dickinson used the term in his June 17 draft of the Articles of Confederation.


The phrase "United States" was originally plural in American usage. It described a collection of states—e.g., "the United States are..." The singular form became popular after the end of the Civil War and is now standard usage. A 
 is called an "
". "United States", "American", and "U.S." refer to the country adjectivally ("American values", "U.S. forces"). In English, the word "American" rarely refers to topics or subjects not directly connected with the United States.


It is generally accepted that the 
 migrated from 
 by way of the 
 and arrived at least 12,000 years ago; however, some evidence suggests an even earlier date of arrival.
 The 
, which appeared around 11,000 BC, is believed to represent the first wave of human settlement of the Americas.
 This was likely the first of three major waves of migration into North America; later waves brought the ancestors of present-day 
, 
, and 
.


Over time, indigenous cultures in North America grew increasingly sophisticated, and some, such as the pre-Columbian 
 in the southeast, developed advanced 
, 
, and complex societies.
 The city-state of 
 is the largest, most complex pre-Columbian 
 in the modern-day United States.
 In the 
 region, 
 culture developed from centuries of agricultural experimentation.
 The 
 are one of the most populous and widespread 
 
 language groups. Historically, the peoples were prominent along the Atlantic Coast and into the interior along the 
 and around the 
. This grouping consists of the peoples who speak 
.
 Before Europeans came into contact, most Algonquian settlements lived by hunting and fishing, although quite a few supplemented their diet by cultivating 
, 
 and 
 (the "
). The 
 cultivated 
.
 The 
 of the 
, located in the southern Great Lakes region, was established at some point between the twelfth and fifteenth centuries.


 during European contact is difficult.
 
 of the 
 estimated a population of 93,000 in the 
 and a population of 473,000 in the Gulf states,
 but most academics regard this figure as too low.
 Anthropologist 
 believed the populations were much higher, suggesting around 1.1 million along the shores of the 
, 2.2 million people living between 
 and 
, 5.2 million in the 
 and tributaries, and around 700,000 people in the 
.


Claims of very early colonization of 
 by the 
 are disputed and controversial.
 The first documented arrival of Europeans in the continental United States is that of Spanish 
 such as 
, who made his first expedition to 
 in 1513.
 The Italian explorer 
, sent by France to the New World in 1525, encountered native inhabitants of what is now 
.
  Even earlier, 
 had landed in 
 on his 
, and 
 was settled by the Spanish a decade later.
 The Spanish set up the first settlements in Florida and New Mexico, such as 
, often considered the nation's oldest city,
 and 
. The French 
 their own settlements along the 
 and 
, notably 
 and 
.


Successful 
 of the eastern coast of North America began with the 
 in 1607 at 
 and with the 
' 
 in 1620.
 The continent's first elected legislative assembly, Virginia's 
, was founded in 1619. 
 was established in the 
 in 1636 as the first institution of higher education. The 
 and the 
 established precedents for representative self-government and constitutionalism that would develop throughout the American colonies.
 Many English settlers were 
 who came seeking 
. The 
 after European arrival for various reasons,
 primarily from diseases such as 
 and 
.


In the early days of colonization, many European settlers experienced food shortages, disease, and conflicts with 
, such as in 
. Native Americans were also often fighting neighboring tribes and European settlers. In many cases, however, the natives and settlers came to depend on each other. Settlers 
 for food and animal pelts; natives for guns, tools and other European goods.
 Natives taught many settlers to cultivate corn, beans, and other foodstuffs. European missionaries and others felt it was important to "civilize" the Native Americans and urged them to adopt European agricultural practices and lifestyles.
 However, with the increased European 
 of North America, 
 were displaced and often killed during conflicts.


European settlers also began 
 
 into Colonial America via the 
.
 Because of a lower prevalence of tropical diseases and relatively better 
, slaves had a much higher life expectancy in North America than in South America, leading to a rapid increase in their numbers.
 Colonial society was largely divided over the religious and moral implications of slavery, and several colonies passed acts for or against the practice.
 However, by the turn of the 18th century, African slaves had supplanted European 
 as 
 labor, especially in the American South.


The 
 that would become the United States of America were administered by the British as overseas dependencies.
 
 with elections open to most free men.
 With very high birth rates, low death rates, and steady settlement, the colonial population grew rapidly, eclipsing Native American populations.
 The 
 movement of the 1730s and 1740s known as the 
 fueled interest both in religion and in religious liberty.


During the 
 (1756–1763), known in the U.S. as the 
, British forces captured Canada from the French. With the creation of the 
, Canada's 
 population would remain isolated from the English-speaking colonial dependencies of 
, 
 and the Thirteen Colonies. Excluding the Native Americans who lived there, the Thirteen Colonies had a population of over 2.1 million in 1770, about a third that of Britain. Despite continuing new arrivals, the rate of natural increase was such that by the 1770s only a small minority of Americans had been born overseas.
 The colonies' distance from Britain had allowed the development of self-government, but their unprecedented success motivated British monarchs to periodically seek to reassert royal authority.


The 
 separated the Thirteen Colonies from the 
, and was the first successful 
 by a non-European entity against a European power in 
. By the 18th century the 
 and 
 were pervasive among leaders. Americans began to develop an ideology of "
", asserting that government rested on the 
. They demanded their "
" and "
".
 The British insisted on administering the colonies through a 
 that did not have a single representative responsible for any American constituency, and the conflict escalated into war.


In 1774, the 
 passed the 
, which mandated a 
 boycott of British goods. The 
 began the following year, catalyzed by events like the 
 and the 
 that were rooted in colonial disagreement with British governance.
 The 
, an assembly representing the 
, unanimously adopted the 
 on July 4, 1776 (annually celebrated as 
).
 In 1781, the 
 and 
 established a decentralized government that operated until 1789.
  A celebrated early turn in the war for the Americans was 
 leading the Americans to 
 in a surprise attack the night of December 25–26, 1776. Another victory, in 1777, at the 
 resulted in the capture of a British army, and led to 
 and 
 joining in the war against them. After the surrender of a second British army at the 
 in 1781, Britain signed a 
. American sovereignty became internationally recognized, and the new nation took possession of substantial territory east of the 
, from what is today 
 in the north and 
 in the south.


As it became increasingly apparent that the Confederation was insufficient to govern the new country, 
 advocated for and led the 
 of 1787 in writing the 
 to replace it, 
 in state conventions in 1788. Going into force in 1789, this constitution reorganized the government into a 
 administered by 
 (executive, judicial and legislative), on the principle of creating salutary 
. George Washington, who had led the 
 to victory and then willingly relinquished power, was the first 
 elected under the new constitution. The 
, forbidding federal restriction of 
 and guaranteeing a range of legal protections, was adopted in 1791.
 
, however, leading to the 
, which was fought to a draw.



Although the federal government 
 American participation in the 
 in 1807, after 1820, cultivation of the highly profitable cotton crop exploded in the 
, and along with it, the use of 
.
 The 
, especially in the period 1800–1840, converted millions to 
 Protestantism. In the North, it energized multiple social reform movements, including 
;
 in the South, 
 and 
 proselytized among slave populations.
 
In the late 18th century, American settlers began to 
, some of them with a sense of 
.
 The 1803 
 almost doubled the nation's area,
 
 and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819,
 the 
 was 
 in 1845 during a period of expansionism,
 and the 1846 
 with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day 
.
 Additionally, the 
 in the 1830s exemplified the 
 that forcibly resettled Indians. This further expanded acreage under mechanical cultivation, increasing surpluses for international markets. This prompted a long series of 
 west of the 
 from 1810 to at least 1890.
   and eventually, conflict with Mexico.
 Most of these conflicts ended with the cession of Native American territory and their confinement to 
. Victory in the 
 resulted in the 1848 
 of 
 and much of the present-day 
, and the U.S. spanned the continent.
 The 
 of 1848–1849 spurred migration to the Pacific coast, which led to the 
 and the creation of additional western states.
 Economic development was spurred by giving vast quantities of land, nearly 10% of the total area of the United States, to white European settlers as part of the 
, as well as making 
 to private railroad companies and 
.
  Prior to the Civil War, 
 exacerbated tensions over 
.

Irreconcilable sectional conflict regarding 
 of Africans and 
 ultimately 
.
 With the 
 of Republican 
, conventions in eleven slave states declared 
 and formed the 
, while the federal government (the "
") maintained that 
.
 On April 12, 1861, the Confederacy initiated military conflict by 
, a federal garrison in 
, South Carolina. This would be the spark of the Civil War, which lasted for four years (1861–1865) and became the deadliest military conflict in American history. The war would result in the deaths of approximately 620,000 soldiers from both sides and upwards of 50,000 civilians, almost all of them in the South.


 began in earnest following the war. While President Lincoln attempted to foster friendship and forgiveness between the Union and the former Confederacy, 
 on April 14, 1865 drove a wedge between North and South again. Republicans in the federal government made it their goal to oversee the rebuilding of the South and to ensure the rights of African Americans. They persisted until the 
, when the Republicans agreed to cease protecting the rights of African Americans in the South in order for Democrats to concede the 
. Southern white Democrats, calling themselves "
", took control of the South after the end of Reconstruction, beginning the 
. From 1890 to 1910, the Redeemers established so-called 
, 
 most blacks and some impoverished whites throughout the region. Blacks would face 
 nationwide, especially in the South.
 They also occasionally experienced vigilante violence, including 
.


In the North, 
 and an unprecedented 
 from 
 and 
 supplied a surplus of labor for the country's industrialization and transformed its culture.
 

National infrastructure, including 
 and 
, spurred economic growth and greater settlement and development of the 
. After the 
, new transcontinental 
 made relocation easier for settlers, expanded internal trade, and increased conflicts with Native Americans.
 The later inventions of 
 and the 
 would also affect communication and urban life.


Mainland expansion also included the 
 from 
 in 1867.
 In 1893, pro-American elements in Hawaii 
 the 
 and formed the 
, which the U.S. 
 in 1898. Puerto Rico, 
, and the 
 were ceded by Spain in the same year, following the 
.
 
 was acquired by the United States in 1900 after the end of the 
.
 The 
 were purchased from 
 in 1917.


 during the late 19th and early 20th centuries fostered the rise of many prominent industrialists. 
 like 
, 
, and 
 led the nation's progress in the 
, 
, and 
 industries. Banking became a major part of the economy, with 
 playing a notable role. The American economy boomed, becoming the world's largest.
 

These dramatic changes were accompanied by 
 and social unrest, which prompted the rise of 
 along with 
, 
, and 
 movements.
 This period eventually ended with the advent of the 
, which saw significant reforms including 
 of consumer goods, the rise of 
, and greater 
 to ensure competition among businesses and attention to worker conditions.

The United States remained neutral from the outbreak of 
 in 1914 until 1917 when it joined the war as an "associated power" alongside the 
, helping to turn the tide against the 
. In 1919, President 
 took a leading diplomatic role at the 
 and advocated strongly for the U.S. to join the 
. However, the Senate refused to approve this and did not ratify the 
 that established the League of Nations.


Around this time, millions of rural African Americans began 
; it would continue until about 1970.
 The last vestiges of the Progressive Era resulted in 
 and 
.
 In 1920, the women's rights movement won passage of a 
 granting 
.
 The 1920s and 1930s saw the rise of 
 for 
 and the invention of early 
.
 The prosperity of the 
 ended with the 
 and the onset of the 
. After his election as president in 1932, 
 responded with the 
.
 The 
 of the mid-1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration.


At first 
, the United States in March 1941 
 to the 
. On December 7, 1941, the 
 launched a surprise 
, prompting the United States to join the Allies against the 
, and in the following year, to 
 about 120,000 Japanese and Japanese Americans.
 The U.S. pursued a "
" defense policy,
 leaving 
, an 
, isolated and alone to fight Japan's 
 until the U.S.-led 
. During the war, the United States was one of the "
"
 who met to plan the postwar world, along with Britain, the Soviet Union, and China.
 The United States emerged 
 from the war, and with even greater economic and military influence.


The United States played a leading role in the 
 and 
 conferences, which signed agreements on new international financial institutions and Europe's postwar reorganization. As an 
, a 1945 
 held in 
 produced the 
, which became active after the war.
 The United States and Japan then fought each other in the largest naval battle in history, the 
.
 The United States developed the 
 and used them on Japan 
 in August 1945; the Japanese 
 on September 2, ending World War II.


After 
, the United States financed and implemented the 
 to help rebuild western Europe; disbursements paid between 1948 and 1952 would total $13 billion ($115 billion in 2021).
 Also at this time, 
 tensions between the United States and 
 led to the 
, driven by an ideological divide between 
 and 
.
 They dominated the military affairs of Europe, with the U.S. and its 
 allies on one side and the Soviet Union and its 
 allies on the other.
 The U.S. often opposed 
 movements that it viewed as Soviet-sponsored, sometimes pursuing direct action for 
 against 
 governments.
 American troops fought the communist forces in the 
 of 1950–1953,
 and the U.S. became increasingly involved in the 
 (1955–1975), introducing combat forces in 1965.
 Their competition to achieve superior 
 capability led to the 
, which culminated in the U.S. becoming the first nation to 
 in 1969.
 While both countries engaged in 
 and developed powerful 
, they avoided direct military conflict.


At home, the United States experienced 
, 
, and a 
 and 
 following World War II. Construction of an 
 transformed the nation's transportation infrastructure in decades to come.
 In 1959, the United States admitted 
 and 
 to become the 49th and 50th states, formally expanding beyond the 
.


The growing 
 used 
 to confront 
, with 
 becoming a prominent leader and figurehead.
 President 
 initiated legislation that led to a series of policies addressing poverty and racial inequalities, in what he termed the "
". The launch of a "
" expanded 
 spending, leading to the creation of the 
, 
, along with national 
 programs 
 and 
.
 A combination of court decisions and legislation, culminating in the 
, made significant improvements.
 Meanwhile, a 
 grew, which was fueled by 
, the 
, and the 
.
 The 
 in the U.S. broadened the debate on women's rights and made 
 a major social goal. The 1969 
 in New York City marked the beginning of the fledgling 
 movement.


The United States supported 
 during the 
; in response, the country faced an oil 
 from 
 nations, sparking the 
. After a surge in female labor participation around the 1970s, by 1985, the majority of women aged 16 and over were employed.
 The 1970s and early 1980s also saw the onset of 
. The presidency of 
 saw the American withdrawal from Vietnam but also the 
 which led to a decline in public trust of government.


After his election in 1980 President 
 responded to economic stagnation with 
 and initiated the more aggressive 
 towards the Soviet Union.
 During Reagan's presidency, the federal debt held by the public nearly tripled in nominal terms, from $738 billion to $2.1 trillion.
 This led to the United States moving from the world's largest international creditor to the world's largest debtor nation.
 The 
 in 1991 ended the Cold War,
 ensuring a global 
 in which the U.S. was unchallenged as the world's dominant 
.


Fearing the spread of 
 international instability from the 
, in August 1991, President 
 launched and led the 
 against Iraq, expelling Iraqi forces and restoring the 
.
 Beginning in 1994, the U.S. signed the 
 (NAFTA), causing trade among the U.S., Canada, and Mexico to soar.
 Due to the 
, stable monetary policy, and 
, the 1990s saw the 
 in modern U.S. history.


On 
, 
 terrorist hijackers flew passenger planes into the 
 in New York City and 
 near Washington, D.C., killing nearly 3,000 people.
 In response, President 
 launched the 
, which included a nearly 20-year 
 from 2001 to 2021 and the 2003–2011 
.
 Government policy designed to promote affordable housing,
 widespread failures in corporate and regulatory governance,
 and historically low interest rates set by the Federal Reserve
 led to a 
 in 2006. This culminated in the 
 and the 
, the nation's largest economic contraction since the Great Depression.


, the first 
 president with 
 ancestry, 
 amid the financial crisis.
 By the end of his second term, the stock market, median household income and net worth, and the number of persons with jobs were all at record levels, while the unemployment rate was well below the historical average.
 His signature legislative accomplishment was the 
 (ACA), popularly known as "Obamacare". It represented the 
's most significant regulatory overhaul and expansion of coverage since Medicare in 1965. As a result, the uninsured share of the population was cut in half, while the number of newly insured Americans was estimated to be between 20 and 24 million.
 After Obama served two terms, Republican 
 was elected as the 
 in 
. 
 is viewed as one of the biggest political upsets in American history.
 Trump held office through 
 of the 
 and the resulting 
 starting in 2020 that exceeded even the Great Recession earlier in the century.


The early 2020s saw the country become more divided, with various social issues sparking debate and protest. The 
 in 2020 led to 
 and a national debate about 
 and lingering 
.
 The nationwide increase in the frequency of instances and number of deaths related to 
 added to the societal tensions.
 On January 6, 2021, supporters of the outgoing president, Trump, 
 in an unsuccessful effort to disrupt the 
 vote count that would confirm Democrat 
 as the 46th president.
 In 2022, the Supreme Court 
, causing 
 across the country and stoking international reactions as well.
 Despite these divisions, the country has remained unified against 
 after 
's 
, with politicians and individuals across the political spectrum supporting arms shipments to Ukraine and many large American corporations pulling out of Russia and Belarus altogether.


The 
 occupy a combined area of 3,119,885 square miles (8,080,470 km
). Of this area, 2,959,064 square miles (7,663,940 km
) is contiguous land, composing 83.65% of total U.S. land area.
 About 15% is occupied by 
, a state in northwestern North America,  with the remainder in 
, a state and  
 in the central 
, and the five populated but 
 insular territories of 
, 
, 
, the 
, and the 
.
 Measured by only land area, the United States is third in size behind Russia and China, and just ahead of Canada.


The United States is the world's 
 nation by total area (land and water), ranking behind Russia and Canada and nearly equal to China. The ranking varies depending on how two territories disputed by China and India are counted, and how the total size of the United States is measured.


The 
 of the 
 seaboard gives way further inland to 
 forests and the rolling hills of the 
.
 The 
 and the 
 
 divide the eastern seaboard from the 
 and the grasslands of the 
.
 The 
–
, the world's 
, runs mainly north–south through the heart of the country. The flat, fertile 
 of the 
 stretches to the west, interrupted by 
 in the southeast.


The 
, west of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, peaking at over 14,000 feet (4,300 m) in 
.
 Farther west are the rocky 
 and deserts such as the 
, 
, and 
.
 The 
 and 
 mountain ranges run close to the 
, both ranges also reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet (4,300 m). The 
 in the contiguous United States are in the state of California,
 and only about 84 miles (135 km) apart.
 At an elevation of 20,310 feet (6,190.5 m), Alaska's 
 is the highest peak in the country and in North America.
 Active 
 are common throughout Alaska's 
 and 
, and Hawaii consists of volcanic islands. The 
 underlying 
 in the 
 is the continent's largest volcanic feature.


The United States, with its large size and geographic variety, includes most climate types. To the east of the 
, the climate ranges from 
 in the north to 
 in the south.


The Great Plains west of the 100th meridian are 
. Many mountainous areas of the American West have an 
. The climate is 
 in the Great Basin, desert in the Southwest, 
 in 
, and 
 in coastal 
 and 
 and southern Alaska. Most of Alaska is 
 or 
. Hawaii and the southern tip of 
 are 
, as well as its territories in the 
 and the Pacific.


States bordering the 
 are prone to 
, and most of the world's 
 occur in the country, mainly in 
 areas in the Midwest and South.
 Overall, the United States receives more high-impact extreme weather incidents than any other country in the world.


Extreme weather has become more frequent in the U.S., with three times the number of reported 
 as in the 1960s. Of the ten warmest years ever recorded in the 48 contiguous states, eight have occurred since 1998. In the 
, droughts have become more persistent and more severe.




The U.S. is one of 17 
 containing large numbers of 
: about 17,000 species of 
 occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and more than 1,800 species of 
 are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland.
 The United States is home to 428 
 species, 784 
, 311 
, and 295 
,
 and 91,000 
 species.


There are 63 
 and hundreds of other federally managed parks, forests, and 
 areas, which are managed by the 
.
 Altogether, the government owns about 28% of the country's land area,
 mostly in the 
.
 Most of this land is 
, though some is leased for oil and gas drilling, mining, logging, or cattle ranching, and about .86% is used for military purposes.


 include debates on oil and 
, dealing with air and water pollution, the economic costs of protecting 
, logging and 
,
 and 
.
 The most prominent environmental agency is the 
 (EPA), created by presidential order in 1970.
 The idea of wilderness has shaped the management of public lands since 1964, with the 
.
 The 
 of 1973 is intended to protect threatened and endangered species and their habitats, which are monitored by the 
.


As of 2020, the U.S. ranked 24th among nations in the 
.
 The country joined the 
 on climate change in 2016, and has many other environmental commitments.
 It 
 from the Paris Agreement in 2020
 but rejoined it in 2021.


The United States is a federal republic of 50 
, a 
, 
 and several uninhabited 
.
 It is the world's oldest surviving 
. It is a 
 and a 
 "in which 
 is tempered by 
 protected by 
."
 In the American 
 system, sovereignty is shared between 
: federal and state. Citizens of the states are also governed by local governments, which are administrative divisions of the states. The territories are administrative divisions of the federal government.

The 
 serves as the country's supreme legal document. The Constitution establishes the structure and responsibilities of the federal government and its relationship with the individual states. The Constitution has been amended 27 times;
 the first ten amendments (
) and the 
 form the central basis of Americans' individual rights. All laws and governmental procedures are subject to 
, and any law can be voided if the courts determine that it violates the Constitution. The principle of judicial review, not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution, was established by the Supreme Court in 
 (1803).


The United States has operated under a 
 for most of its history.
 In American 
, the 
 Republican Party is considered "
" and the 
 Democratic Party is considered "
".
 On 
's 2019 
, its 
 position deteriorated from a score of 76 in 2015 to 69 in 2019.
 In 2021, the U.S. ranked 26th on the 
, and is described as a "flawed democracy".


The federal government comprises three branches, which are headquartered in Washington, D.C. and regulated by a system of 
 defined by the Constitution.


The 
, the 
, has 435 voting members, each representing a 
 for a two-year term. House seats are 
 among the states by population. Each state then draws single-member districts to conform with the census apportionment. The District of Columbia and the five major U.S. territories each have 
—these members are not allowed to vote.


The 
, the 
, has 100 members with each state having two senators, elected 
 to six-year terms; one-third of Senate seats are up for election every two years. The District of Columbia and the five major U.S. territories do not have senators.
 The Senate is unique among upper houses in being the most prestigious and powerful portion of the country's 
; political scientists have frequently labeled it the "most powerful upper house" of any government.


The president serves a four-year term and may be elected to the office 
. The president is 
, but by an indirect 
 system in which the determining votes are apportioned to the states and the District of Columbia.
 The Supreme Court, led by the 
, has nine members, who serve for life.


Each of the 50 states holds jurisdiction over a geographic territory, where it shares 
 with the federal government. They are subdivided into 
, and further divided into 
. The District of Columbia is a 
 that contains the capital of the United States, the 
.
 Each state has the amount 
 equal to the number of their representatives plus senators in Congress, and the District of Columbia has three electors.
 Territories of the United States do not have presidential electors, therefore people there cannot vote for the president.


, the District of Columbia, and all major U.S. territories except American Samoa.
 The United States observes limited 
 of the American Indian nations, like states' sovereignty. American Indians are U.S. citizens and tribal lands are subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Congress and the federal courts. Like the states, tribes have some autonomy restrictions. They are prohibited from making war, engaging in their own foreign relations, and printing or issuing independent currency.
 
 are usually contained within one state, but there are 12 reservations that cross state boundaries.
 

The United States has an established structure of foreign relations, and it had the world's second-largest diplomatic corps in 2019.
 It is a 
 of the 
,
 and home to the 
.
 The United States is also a member of the 
,
 
,
 and 
 intergovernmental organizations.
 Almost all countries have 
 and many have 
 (official representatives) in the country. Likewise, nearly all nations host formal 
 with United States, except 
,
 
,
 and 
.
 Though 
 does not have formal diplomatic relations with the U.S., it maintains close, if unofficial, relations. The United States also regularly supplies Taiwan with 
.


The United States has a "
" with the 
 and strong ties with 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 
,
 and several 
 countries (
, 
, 
, 
, and 
).
 The U.S. works closely with its 
 allies on military and 
 issues, and with nations in the Americas through the 
 and the 
. In 
, 
 is traditionally considered to be the closest ally of the United States.
 The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for 
, the 
 and 
 through the 
.
 Since the 
, the U.S. has become a key ally of 
 since 
 
 and began an 
, significantly deteriorating relations with Russia in the process.
 The U.S. has also experienced a deterioration of relations with 
 and grown closer to 
.


The president is the 
 of the United States Armed Forces and appoints its leaders, the 
 and the 
. The 
, which is headquartered at 
 near Washington, D.C., administers five of the six service branches, which are made up of the 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. The 
 is administered by the 
 in peacetime and can be transferred to the 
 in wartime.
 The United States spent $649 billion on its military in 2019, 36% of global military spending. At 4.7% of GDP, the percentage was the second-highest among all countries, after 
.
 It also has 
, the second-largest after Russia.


In 2019, all six branches of the U.S. Armed Forces reported 1.4 million personnel on active duty.
 The 
 and 
 brought the total number of troops to 2.3 million.
 The Department of Defense also employed about 700,000 civilians, not including 
.
 Military service in the United States is voluntary, although 
 may occur in wartime through the 
.
 The United States has the third-largest combined armed forces in the world, behind the 
 and 
.


Today, American forces can be rapidly deployed by the Air Force's large fleet of 
, the Navy's 11 active 
, and 
 at sea with the Navy, and Army's 
 and 
 deployed by Air Force transport aircraft. The Air Force can strike targets across the globe through its fleet of 
, maintains the 
 across the United States, and provides 
 to Army and Marine Corps ground forces.
 The Space Force operates the 
, operates the 
 and 
 for all space launches, and operates the United States's 
 and 
 networks.
 The military operates about 800 bases and facilities abroad,
 and maintains 
 in 25 foreign countries.


There are about 18,000 U.S. police agencies from local to federal level in the United States.
 Law in the United States is mainly 
 by local police departments and 
's offices. The 
 provides broader services, and 
 such as the 
 (FBI) and the 
 have specialized duties, such as protecting 
, 
 and enforcing 
' rulings and federal laws.
 
 conduct most civil and criminal trials,
 and federal courts handle designated crimes and appeals from the state criminal courts.


As of 2020
, the United States has an 
 of 7 per 100,000 people.
 A cross-sectional analysis of the 
 Mortality Database from 2010 showed that United States homicide rates "were 7.0 times higher than in other high-income countries, driven by a gun homicide rate that was 25.2 times higher."


The United States has the 
 and 
 in the world.
 In 2019, the total prison population for those sentenced to more than a year is 1,430,800, corresponding to a ratio of 419 per 100,000 residents and the lowest since 1995.
 Some estimates place that number higher, such 
's 2.3 million.
 Various states have attempted to 
 via government policies and grassroots initiatives.


Although most nations have abolished 
,
 it is sanctioned in the United States for certain federal and military crimes, and in 27 states out of 50 and in one territory.
 Several of these states have 
 on carrying out the penalty, each imposed by the state's  governor.
 Since 1977, there have been more than 1,500 executions,
 giving the U.S. the sixth-highest number of executions in the world, following 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 However, the number is trended down nationally, with 
 recently abolishing the penalty.


According to the 
, the U.S. 
 (GDP) of $22.7 trillion constitutes 24% of the 
 at market exchange rates and over 16% of the gross world product at 
 (PPP).
 From 1983 to 2008, U.S. real compounded annual GDP growth was 3.3%, compared to a 2.3% weighted average for the rest of the G7.
 The country ranks fifth in the world in 
 and seventh in 
.
 The country has been the 
 since at least 1900.


The United States is the most 
 powerful and 
 nation, especially in 
, 
, 
, and 
, 
, and 
.
 The nation's economy is fueled by abundant 
, a well-developed infrastructure, and high productivity.
 It has the second-highest total-estimated value of natural resources, valued at 
 44.98
trillion in 2019, although sources differ on their estimates.
 Americans have the highest average 
 and 
 income among 
 member states.
 In 2013, they had the sixth-highest 
, down from fourth-highest in 2010.


The 
 is the currency most used in 
 and is the world's foremost 
, backed by its economy, its 
, the 
 and its linked 
 and large 
.
 Several countries 
 and in others it is the 
.
 The 
 and 
 are the world's 
 by 
 and 
.


The 
 are 
, the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, the 
, and 
.
 The U.S. is the world's 
 and the 
.
 It has 
 with 
, including the 
.
 The U.S. ranked second in the 
 in 2019, after 
.
 Of the world's 
, 124 are headquartered in the U.S.


While its economy has reached a 
 level of development, the United States remains an industrial power.
 It has a smaller 
 and redistributes less income through government action than most other 
 countries.
 The United States ranked the 41st highest in 
 among 156 countries in 2017,
 and the highest compared to the rest of the 
.
 As of January 1, 2023, the United States had a 
 of $31.4 trillion.


Accounting for 4.24% of the 
, Americans collectively 
 of the world's total wealth as of 2021, the largest percentage of any country.
 The U.S. also ranks first in the number of dollar 
 and 
 in the world, with 724 billionaires (as of 2021)
 and nearly 22 million millionaires (2021).
 

 is 
; the richest 10% of the adult population own 72% of the country's household wealth, while the bottom 50% own just 2%.
 
 in the U.S. remains at record highs,
 with the top fifth of earners taking home more than half of all income
 and giving the U.S. one of the widest income distributions among OECD members.


The United States is the only 
 that does not 
 and is one of a few countries in the world without 
 as a legal right.
 The United States also has a higher percentage of low-income workers than almost any other developed nation, largely because of a weak 
 system and lack of government support for at-risk workers.


There were about 567,715 sheltered and unsheltered 
 in January 2019, with almost two-thirds staying in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program.
 Attempts to combat homelessness include the 
 housing voucher program and implementation of the 
 strategy across all levels of government.
 

In 2011, 
, about 35% more than 2007 levels, though only 845,000 U.S. children (1.1%) saw reduced food intake or disrupted eating patterns at some point during the year, and most cases were not chronic.
 As of June 2018,
 40 million people, roughly 12.7% of the U.S. population, were living in poverty, including 13.3 million children. Of those impoverished, 18.5 million live in "deep poverty", family income below one-half of the federal government's poverty threshold.


The United States has been a leader in technological 
 since the late 19th century and scientific research since the mid-20th century. Methods for producing 
 and the establishment of a 
 industry enabled the 
 of sewing machines, bicycles, and other items in the late 19th century. In the early 20th century, factory 
, the introduction of the 
, and other labor-saving techniques created the system of 
.
 In the 21st century, approximately two-thirds of research and development funding comes from the private sector.
 In 2020, the United States was the country with the 
 number of published scientific papers
 and second most patents granted,
 both after China. In 2021, the United States launched a total of 51 
. (China reported 55.)
 The U.S. had 2,944 active 
 in space in December 2021, the highest number of any country.


In 1876, 
 was awarded the first U.S. 
. 
's 
 developed the 
, the first 
, and the first viable 
.
 The 
 in 1903 made the 
, and the automobile companies of 
 and 
 popularized the assembly line in the early 20th century.
 The rise of 
 and 
 in the 1920s and 30s led many European scientists, such as 
, 
, and 
, to immigrate to the United States.
 During World War II, the Manhattan Project developed nuclear weapons, ushering in the 
. During the Cold War, competition for superior missile capability ushered in the 
 between the U.S. and Soviet Union.
 The invention of the 
 in the 1950s, a key component in almost all modern 
, led to the development of 
, 
, 
 and the 
.
 In 2022, the United States ranked 2nd in the 
.


As of 2019
, the United States receives approximately 80% of its energy from fossil fuels.
 In 2019, the largest source of the country's energy came from 
 (36.6%), followed by 
 (32%), 
 (11.4%), renewable sources (11.4%) and 
 (8.4%).
 Americans constitute less than 5% of the 
, but consume 17% of the 
.
 They account for about 25% of the world's 
, while producing only 6% of the world's annual petroleum supply.
 The U.S. ranks as second-highest emitter of greenhouse gases, exceeded only by China.


The United States's 
, nearly all 
, is the 
, and exceeds 293,564 km (182,400 mi).
 It handles mostly freight, with intercity passenger service provided by 
 to all but four states.
 The country's 
 are the world's 
, and total 41,009 km (25,482 mi).


Personal transportation is dominated by automobiles, which operate on a network of 4 million miles (6.4 million kilometers) of public roads.
 The United States has the world's second-largest automobile market,
 and has the highest vehicle ownership per capita in the world, with 816.4 vehicles per 1,000 Americans (2014).
 In 2017, there were 255 million non-two wheel motor vehicles, or about 910 vehicles per 1,000 people.


The 
 is entirely privately owned and has been largely 
, while 
 are publicly owned.
 The three largest airlines in the world by passengers carried are U.S.-based; 
 is number one after its 2013 acquisition by 
.
 Of the 
, 16 are in the United States, including the busiest, 
.
 Of the 
, four are located in the United States, of which the busiest is the 
.


Racial and ethnic groups in the United States (2020 Census)


The 
 reported 331,449,281 residents as of April 1, 2020,
 making the United States the 
 nation in the world, after China and India.
 According to the Bureau's 
, on January 28, 2021, the U.S. population had a net gain of one person every 100 seconds, or about 864 people per day.
 In 2018, 52% of Americans age 15 and over were married, 6% were widowed, 10% were divorced, and 32% had never been married.
 In 2020, the U.S. had a 
 stood at 1.64 children per woman
 and the world's highest rate (23%) of children living in 
 households.


The United States of America has a diverse population; 37 
 have more than one million members.
 
 with ancestry from Europe, the Middle East or North Africa, form the largest 
 and 
 at 57.8% of the United States population.
 
 form the second-largest group and are 18.7% of the United States population. 
 constitute the nation's third-largest ancestry group and are 12.1% of the total United States population.
 
 are the country's fourth-largest group, composing 5.9% of the United States population, while the country's 3.7 million 
 account for about 1%.
 In 2020, the 
 of the United States population was 38.5 years.


In 2018, there were almost 90 million immigrants and 
 in the United States, accounting for 28% of the overall U.S. population.
 In 2017, out of the U.S. foreign-born population, some 45% (20.7 million) were naturalized citizens, 27% (12.3 million) were lawful permanent residents, 6% (2.2 million) were temporary lawful residents, and 23% (10.5 million) were unauthorized immigrants.
 The United States led the world in 
 for decades, admitting more refugees than the rest of the world combined.


English (specifically, 
) is the de facto 
 of the United States. Although there is no 
 at the federal level, some laws—such as 
—standardize English, and most states have declared English as the official language.
 Three states and four U.S. territories have recognized local or indigenous languages in addition to English, including Hawaii (
),
 Alaska (
),
 South Dakota (
),
 American Samoa (
), Puerto Rico (
), Guam (
), and the Northern Mariana Islands (
 and Chamorro). In Puerto Rico, Spanish is more widely spoken than English.


According to the 
, in 2010 some 229 million people (out of the total U.S. population of 308 million) spoke only English at home. More than 37 million spoke 
 at home, making it the second most commonly used language in the United States. Other languages spoken at home by one million people or more include 
 (2.8 million), 
 (1.6 million), 
 (1.4 million), 
 (1.3 million), 
 (1.1 million), and 
 (1 million).


The 
 in the United States, in terms of enrollment numbers from kindergarten through university 
, are Spanish (around 7.2 million students), French (1.5 million), and 
 (500,000). Other commonly taught languages include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


Religion in the United States (2022 
)


A large variety of faiths have historically flourished within the country. According to the 
 in 2017, the United States is more 
 than the median country; they ranked the United States the 32nd least religious country in the world.
 Until the 1990s, the country was a substantial 
 among other 
 countries: uniquely 
, although this has lessened significantly since then.
 Studies during the early 2020s found that about 81% of Americans believe in some conception of God, 45% report 
 on a daily basis, 41% report that religion plays a very important role in their lives, and 31% report attending religious services weekly or near weekly.
 58% of Americans report "seldom" or "never" attending religious services.
 

In a 2020 survey, about 64% of adults in the United States identified themselves as 
 making it the country with the 
.
 
 is the largest Christian religious grouping in the United States, accounting for around a third of all Americans. In the so-called 
, located primarily within the 
, socially conservative 
 plays a significant role culturally. By contrast, religion plays the least important role in 
 and the Western United States.


Another 6% claimed a non-Christian faith;
 the largest of which are 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 

Around 30% of Americans describe themselves as having 
.
 Membership in a house of worship fell from 70% in 1999 to 47% in 2020, much of the decline related to the number of Americans expressing no religious preference. Membership also fell among those who identified with a specific religious group.
 According to 
, trust in "the church or organized religion" has declined significantly since the 1970s.
 

The 
 of the U.S. Constitution guarantees the 
 of religion and forbids Congress from passing laws respecting its 
.


About 82% of Americans live in 
, including suburbs;
 about half of those reside in cities with populations over 50,000.
 In 2008, 273 
 had populations over 100,000, nine cities had more than one million residents, and four cities (
, 
, 
, and 
) had populations exceeding two million.
 Many U.S. metropolitan populations are growing rapidly, particularly in the South and West.


American 
 is operated by state and local governments and regulated by the 
 through restrictions on federal grants. In most states, children are required to attend school from the age of five or six (beginning with 
 or 
) until they turn 18 (generally bringing them through 
, the end of 
); some states allow students to leave school at 16 or 17.
 Of Americans 25 and older, 84.6% graduated from high school, 52.6% attended some college, 27.2% earned a 
, and 9.6% earned graduate degrees.
 The basic 
 rate is approximately 99%.


The United States has many private and public 
. The majority of the world's top 
 and 
, as listed by various ranking organizations, are in the United States.
 There are also local 
 with generally more open admission policies, shorter academic programs, and lower tuition.
 The U.S. spends more on education per student than any nation in the world,
 spending an average of $12,794 per year on public elementary and secondary school students in the 2016–2017 school year.
 As for 
 on higher education, the U.S. spends more per student than the 
 average, and more than all nations in combined public and private spending.
 Despite some student 
 programs in place,
 
 has increased by 102% in the last decade,
 and exceeded 1.7 trillion dollars as of 2022.


In a preliminary report, the 
 (CDC) announced that U.S. 
 at birth had dropped to 76.4 years in 2021 (73.2 years for men and 79.1 years for women), down 0.9 years from 2020. This was the second year of overall decline, and the chief causes listed were the 
 pandemic, accidents, drug overdoses, heart and liver disease, and suicides.
 Life expectancy was highest among Asians and Hispanics and lowest among Blacks and American Indian–Alaskan Native (
) peoples.
 Starting in 1998, the average life expectancy in the U.S. fell behind that of other wealthy industrialized countries, and Americans' "health disadvantage" gap has been increasing ever since.
 The U.S. also has one of the highest 
 rates among 
,
 and approximately one-third of the U.S. adult population is obese and another third is overweight.


In 2010, 
, 
, 
, 
, and traffic collisions caused the most years of life lost in the U.S. 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 caused the most years lost to disability. The most harmful 
 were poor diet, 
, obesity, 
, 
, 
, and 
. 
, 
, 
, 
, and falls caused the most additional years of life lost over their age-adjusted 1990 per-capita rates.
 
 and 
 rates in the U.S. are substantially higher than in other Western nations, especially among blacks and Hispanics.


The U.S. health care system far 
 that of any other nation, measured both in per capita spending and as a percentage of GDP but attains worse healthcare outcomes when compared to peer nations.
 The U.S., however, is a global leader in medical innovation. The United States is the only developed nation 
, and a 
.


Government-funded health care coverage for the poor (
, established in 1965) and for those age 65 and older (
, begun in 1966) is available to Americans who meet the programs' income or age qualifications. In 2010, former President Obama passed the 
 or ACA,
 which the CDC said that the law roughly halved the uninsured share of the population
 and multiple studies have concluded that ACA had reduced the mortality of enrollees.
 However, its legacy 
.


The United States is home to a 
 of ethnic groups, traditions, and values,
 and exerts major cultural influence 
.
 Aside from the Native American, 
, and 
 populations, nearly all Americans or their ancestors immigrated or were imported as slaves within the past five centuries.
 
 American culture is a 
 largely derived from the 
 with influences from many other sources, such as 
.
 

More recent immigration from 
 and especially 
 has added to a cultural mix that has been described as a homogenizing 
, and a heterogeneous 
, with immigrants contributing to, and often 
 into, mainstream American culture.
 Nevertheless, there is a high degree of social inequality related to 
 and 
.


Americans have traditionally 
 by a strong 
,
 competitiveness,
 and individualism,
 as well as a unifying belief in an "
" emphasizing liberty, 
, 
, democracy, 
, and a preference for limited government.
 Americans are extremely charitable by global standards: according to a 2016 study by the 
, Americans donated 1.44% of total GDP to charity, the 
 by a large margin.


The 
, or the perception that Americans enjoy high 
, plays a key role in attracting immigrants.
 Whether this perception is accurate has been a topic of debate.
 While mainstream culture holds that the United States is a 
,
 scholars identify significant differences between 
, affecting 
, language, and values.
 Americans tend to greatly value 
 achievement, but being 
 is promoted by some as a noble condition.


In the 18th and early 19th centuries, American art and literature took most of their cues from Europe, contributing to Western culture. Writers such as 
, 
, 
, and 
 established a distinctive American literary voice by the middle of the 19th century. 
 and poet 
 were major figures in the century's second half; 
, virtually unknown during her lifetime, is recognized as an essential American poet.


A work seen as capturing fundamental aspects of the national experience and character—such as 
's 
 (1851), Twain's 
 (1885), 
's 
 (1925) and 
's 
 (1960)—may be dubbed the "
."
 

Thirteen U.S. citizens have won the 
. 
, 
 and 
 are often named among the most influential writers of the 20th century.
  The 
 writers opened up new literary approaches, as have 
 authors such as 
, 
, and 
.


In the visual arts, the 
 was a mid-19th-century movement in the tradition of European 
. The 1913 
 in New York City, an exhibition of European 
, shocked the public and transformed the U.S. art scene.
 
, 
, and others experimented with new, individualistic styles. 

Major artistic movements such as the 
 of 
 and 
 and the 
 of 
 and 
 developed largely in the United States. The tide of modernism and then 
 has brought fame to American architects such as 
, 
, and 
.
 Americans have long been important in the modern artistic medium of 
, with major photographers including 
, 
, 
, and 
.


, a northern district of Los Angeles, California, is one of the leaders in motion picture production.
 The world's first commercial motion picture exhibition was given in New York City in 1894, using the 
.
 Since the early 20th century, the U.S. film industry has largely been based in and around Hollywood, although in the 21st century an increasing number of films are not made there, and film companies have been subject to the forces of globalization.
 The 
, popularly known as the Oscars, have been held annually by the 
 since 1929,
 and the 
 have been held annually since January 1944.


Director 
, an American 
 during the 
 period, was central to the development of 
, and producer/entrepreneur 
 was a leader in both 
 and movie 
.
 Directors such as 
 redefined the image of the American Old West, and, like others such as 
, broadened the possibilities of cinema with location shooting. The industry enjoyed its golden years, in what is commonly referred to as the "
", from the early sound period until the early 1960s,
 with screen actors such as 
 and 
 becoming iconic figures.
 In the 1970s, "
" or the "Hollywood Renaissance"
 was defined by grittier films influenced by French and Italian realist pictures of the 
.


Theater in the United States derives from the old European theatrical tradition and has been heavily influenced by the 
.
 The central hub of the American theater scene has been 
, with its divisions of 
, 
, and 
.
 Many movie and television stars have gotten their big break working in New York productions. Outside New York City, many cities have professional 
 that produce their own seasons, with some works being produced regionally with hopes of eventually moving to New York. The biggest-budget theatrical productions are 
. U.S. theater also has an active 
 culture, which relies mainly on local volunteers who may not be actively pursuing a theatrical career.


 encompasses numerous music genres, variously known as traditional music, traditional 
, contemporary folk music, or roots music. Many traditional songs have been sung within the same family or folk group for generations, and sometimes trace back to such origins as the 
, 
, or Africa.


Among America's earliest composers was a man named 
 who, born in Boston, composed patriotic hymns in the 1770s;
 Billings was a part of the 
, who dominated American music during its earliest stages. 
 was the most prominent composer before the Civil War. From the mid- to late 1800s, 
 of the late 
 composed numerous military songs—
—and is regarded as one of America's greatest composers.


The rhythmic and lyrical styles of 
 have significantly influenced 
 at large, distinguishing it from European and African traditions. Elements from folk idioms such as the 
 and what is known as 
 were adopted and transformed into 
 with global audiences. 
 was developed by innovators such as 
 and 
 early in the 20th century. 
 developed in the 1920s, and 
 in the 1940s.


 and 
 were among the pioneers of 
 in the mid-1950s. Rock bands such as 
, the 
, and 
 are among the 
 in worldwide sales.
 In the 1960s, 
 emerged from the 
 to become one of America's most celebrated songwriters.
 Mid-20th-century American pop stars such as 
, 
,
 and Elvis Presley became global celebrities,
 as have artists of the late 20th century such as 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


The four major broadcasters in the U.S. are the 
 (NBC), 
 (CBS), 
 (ABC), and 
 (FOX). The four major broadcast 
 are all commercial entities. 
 offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of niches.
 As of 2021
, about 83% of Americans over age 12 listen to 
, while about 41% listen to 
.
 As of September 30, 2014
, there are 15,433 licensed full-power radio stations in the U.S. according to the U.S. 
 (FCC).
 Much of the public radio broadcasting is supplied by 
, incorporated in February 1970 under the 
.


Well-known U.S. newspapers include 
, 
, and 
.
 More than 800 publications are produced in Spanish, the second most commonly used language in the United States behind English.
 With very few exceptions, all the newspapers in the U.S. are privately owned, either by large chains such as 
 or 
, which own dozens or even hundreds of newspapers; by small chains that own a handful of papers; or, in a situation that is increasingly rare, by individuals or families. Major cities often have 
 to complement the mainstream daily papers, such as New York City's 
 or Los Angeles' 
. The five most popular websites used in the U.S. are 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


The 
 is the world's 2nd largest by revenue.
 It generated $90 billion in annual economic output in 2020. Furthermore, the video game industry contributed $12.6 billion in federal, state, and municipal taxes annually.
 Some of the largest video game companies like 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 are based in the United States.
 Some of the most popular and best selling video games like 
, 
 and 
 are made by American 
.
 The American video gaming business is still a significant employer. More than 143,000 individuals are employed directly and indirectly by video game companies throughout 50 states. The national compensation for direct workers is US$2.9 billion, or an average wage of US$121,000.


Early settlers were introduced by Native Americans to such indigenous, non-European foods as turkey, 
, 
, 
, and 
. They and later immigrants combined these with foods they had known, such as 
,
 beef, and milk to create a distinctive American cuisine.
 Homegrown foods are part of a shared national menu on one of America's most popular holidays, 
, when many Americans make or purchase traditional foods to celebrate the occasion.


The American 
 industry, the world's largest,
 pioneered the 
 format in the 1940s.
 Characteristic American dishes such as 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
 derive from the recipes of various immigrants.
 
 dishes such as 
 and 
 and 
 dishes freely adapted from 
 sources are widely consumed.


Americans drink three times as much coffee as tea.
 Marketing by U.S. industries is largely responsible for making orange juice and milk standard 
.


The most popular sports in the U.S. are 
, 
, 
 and 
.


While most major U.S. sports such as 
 and 
 have evolved out of European practices, 
, 
, 
, and 
 are American inventions, some of which have become popular worldwide.
 
 and 
 arose from Native American and Native Hawaiian activities that predate Western contact.
 The market for 
 in the United States is roughly $69 billion, roughly 50% larger than that of all of Europe, the Middle East, and Africa combined.


American football is by several measures the most popular spectator sport in the United States;
 the 
 (NFL) has the highest average attendance of any sports league in the world, and the 
 is watched by tens of millions globally.
 Baseball has been regarded as the U.S. 
 since the late 19th century, with 
 being the top league. Basketball and 
 are the country's next two most popular professional team sports, with the top leagues being the 
 and the 
. The most-watched 
 in the U.S. are 
 and 
, particularly 
 and 
.


Eight 
 have taken place in the United States. The 
 in 
, 
, were the first-ever Olympic Games held outside of Europe.
 The Olympic Games will be held in the U.S. for a ninth time when 
 hosts the 
. As of 2021
, the United States has won 2,629 medals at the 
, more than any other country, and 330 in the 
, the second most behind Norway.
 In 
, the 
 qualified for 
 and the 
 has 
 the 
 four times.
 The United States hosted the 
 and will host the 
 along with 
 and 
. On the 
 level, earnings for the member institutions exceed $1 billion annually,
 and 
 and 
 attract large audiences, as the 
 is one of the most watched sporting events.




 




				Pages for logged out editors 

			






 (
),
 officially the 
 (French: 
), is a country in 
-
. It is bordered by 
 to the west and north; 
 to the northeast; the 
 to the east; and 
, 
 and the 
 to the south. Its coastline lies on the 
, part of the 
 and the 
. Due to its strategic position at the crossroads between 
 and 
, it has been categorized as being in both camps. Its nearly 27 million people speak 250 native languages.


Early inhabitants of the territory included the 
 around 
, and the 
 hunter-gatherers in the southeastern rainforest. 
 reached the coast in the 15th century and named the area 
 (
), which became 
 in English. 
 soldiers founded the 
 in the north in the 19th century, and various ethnic groups of the west and northwest established powerful chiefdoms and 
. Cameroon became a 
 in 1884 known as 
. After 
, it was divided between 
 and the 
 as 
. The 
 (UPC) political party advocated independence, but was outlawed by France in the 1950s, leading to the 
 fought between French and UPC militant forces until early 1971. In 1960, the French-administered part of Cameroon became independent, as the Republic of Cameroun, under President 
. The 
 of 
 federated with it in 1961 to form the 
 of Cameroon. The federation was abandoned in 1972. The country was renamed the 
 of Cameroon in 1972 and back to the Republic of Cameroon in 1984 by a presidential decree by president Paul Biya. 
, the incumbent president, has led the country since 1982 following Ahidjo's resignation; he previously held office as prime minister from 1975 on. Cameroon is governed as a 
 
.

The 
 of Cameroon are French and English, the official languages of former 
 and 
. Its 
 is predominantly Christian, with a significant minority 
, and others following 
. It has experienced 
 from the English-speaking territories, where politicians have advocated for greater decentralisation and even complete separation or independence (as in the 
). In 2017, tensions over the creation of an 
 state in the English-speaking territories escalated into 
.

Large numbers of Cameroonians live as 
. The country is often referred to as "Africa in miniature" for its geological, linguistic and cultural diversity.
 Its natural features include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. Its highest point, at almost 4,100 metres (13,500 ft), is 
 in the 
. Its most populous cities are 
 on the 
, its economic capital and main seaport; 
, its political capital; and 
. 
 in the Southwest has a natural seaport. Cameroon is well known for its native music styles, particularly 
, Njang and 
, and for its successful 
. It is a member state of the 
, the 
, the 
 (OIF), the 
, 
 and the 
.

Originally, Cameroon was the 
 given by the 
 to the 
, which they called 
 meaning "river of 
" or "shrimp river", referring to the then abundant 
.
 Today the country's name in 
 remains 
.

Present-day Cameroon was first settled in the 
 Era. The longest continuous inhabitants are groups such as the 
 (
).
 From there, 
 into eastern, southern and central Africa are believed to have occurred about 2,000 years ago.
 The 
 culture arose around 
, c. 500 AD, and gave way to the Kanem and its successor state, the 
. Kingdoms, 
, and 
 arose in the west.


 reached the coast in 1472. They noted an abundance of the ghost shrimp 
 in the 
 and named it 
 (
), which became 
 in English.
 Over the following few centuries, European interests regularised trade with the coastal peoples, and Christian 
 pushed inland.


The 
 began at the end of the 16th century. Born in Logone-Birni, Cameroon, 
 (
 – 14 May 1781[1]), Russian military engineer, general-in-chief, and nobleman, was kidnapped as a child by Ottomans, traded, presented to Peter the Great, who freed him, adopted and raised him as his godson. His descendants entered the Russian nobility. One of them was Russia's national poet 
.


In the early 19th century, 
 led 
 soldiers on a 
 in the north against non-Muslim and partially Muslim peoples and established the 
. Settled peoples who fled the Fulani caused a major redistribution of population.


In 1896, Sultan 
 created the 
, or Shu Mom, for the 
.
 It is taught in Cameroon today by the 
.


Germany began to establish roots in Cameroon in 1868 when the Woermann Company of Hamburg built a warehouse. It was built on the estuary of the Wouri River. Later Gustav Nachtigal made a treaty with one of the local kings to annex the region for the German emperor.
 The 
 claimed the territory as the colony of 
 in 1884 and began a steady push inland; the natives resisted. Under the aegis of Germany commercial companies were local administrations. These 
 used 
 to run profitable banana, rubber, palm oil, and cocoa plantations.
 Even infrastructure projects relied on forced labor regimen. This economic policy was much criticised by the other colonial powers.


With the defeat of Germany in 
, Kamerun became a 
 territory and was split into 
 (
: 
) and 
 in 1919. France integrated the economy of Cameroon with that of France
 and improved the infrastructure with capital investments and skilled workers, modifying the colonial system of forced labour.


The British administered their territory from neighbouring 
. Natives complained that this made them a neglected "colony of a colony". Nigerian migrant workers flocked to Southern Cameroons, ending forced labour altogether but angering the local natives, who felt swamped.
 The League of Nations mandates were converted into 
 in 1946, and the question of independence became a pressing issue in French Cameroon.


France outlawed the pro-independence political party, the 
 (
; UPC), on 13 July 1955.
 This prompted a 
 waged by the UPC and the assassination of several of the party's leaders, including 
, 
 and 
. In the British Cameroons, the question was whether to reunify with French Cameroon or join Nigeria; the British ruled out the option of independence.


On 1 January 1960, French Cameroun gained independence from France under President 
. On 1 October 1961, the formerly British 
 gained independence from the United Kingdom by vote of the UN General Assembly and joined with French Cameroun to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon, a date which is now observed as 
, a 
.
 Ahidjo used the ongoing war with the UPC to concentrate power in the presidency, continuing with this even after the suppression of the UPC in 1971.


His political party, the 
 (CNU), became the sole legal political party on 1 September 1966 and on 20 May 1972, a referendum was passed to abolish the 
 in favour of a United Republic of Cameroon, headed from 
.
 This day is now the country's 
, a public holiday.
 Ahidjo pursued an economic policy of 
, prioritising 
 and petroleum development. The government used oil money to create a national cash reserve, pay farmers, and finance major development projects; however, many initiatives failed when Ahidjo appointed unqualified allies to direct them.


The 
 was changed on 20 May 1975. Two stars were removed, replaced with a large central star as a symbol of national unity.

Ahidjo stepped down on 4 November 1982 and left power to his constitutional successor, 
. However, Ahidjo remained in control of the CNU and tried to run the country from behind the scenes until Biya and his allies pressured him into resigning. Biya began his administration by moving toward a more democratic government, but a failed 
 nudged him toward the leadership style of his predecessor.


An 
 took effect in the mid-1980s to late 1990s as a result of international economic conditions, drought, falling 
 prices, and years of corruption, mismanagement, and 
. Cameroon turned to foreign aid, cut government spending, and 
 industries. With the reintroduction of multi-party politics in December 1990, the former British Southern Cameroons pressure groups called for greater autonomy, and the 
 advocated complete secession as the Republic of 
.
 The 1992 Labour Code of Cameroon gives workers the freedom to belong to a trade union or not to belong to any trade union at all. It is the choice of a worker to join any trade union in his occupation since there are more than one trade union in each occupation.


In June 2006, talks concerning a territorial dispute over the 
 peninsula were resolved. The talks involved President Paul Biya of Cameroon, then President 
 of Nigeria and then UN Secretary General 
, and resulted in Cameroonian control of the oil-rich peninsula. The northern portion of the territory was formally handed over to the Cameroonian government in August 2006, and the remainder of the peninsula was left to Cameroon 2 years later, in 2008.
 The boundary change triggered a 
, as many Bakassians refused to accept Cameroonian rule. While most militants laid down their arms in November 2009,
 some carried on fighting for years.


In February 2008, Cameroon experienced its worst violence in 15 years when a transport union strike in Douala escalated into 
 in 31 municipal areas.


In May 2014, in the wake of the 
, presidents Paul Biya of Cameroon and 
 of 
 announced they were waging war on 
, and deployed troops to the Nigerian border.
 Boko Haram launched several attacks into Cameroon, killing 84 civilians in a 
, but suffering a heavy defeat in a 
. Cameroon declared victory over Boko Haram on Cameroonian territory in September 2018.


Since November 2016, protesters from the predominantly English-speaking 
 and 
 regions of the country have been campaigning for continued use of the English language in schools and courts. People were killed and hundreds jailed as a result of these protests.
 In 2017, Biya's government blocked the regions' access to the Internet for three months.
 In September, separatists started 
 for the independence of the Anglophone region as the Federal Republic of 
. The government responded with a military offensive, and the insurgency spread across the Northwest and Southwest regions. As of 2019
, fighting between separatist guerillas and government forces continues.
 During 2020, numerous terrorist attacks—many of them carried out without claims of credit—and government reprisals have led to bloodshed throughout the country.
 Since 2016, more than 450,000 people have fled their homes.
 The conflict indirectly led to an 
 in Boko Haram attacks, as the Cameroonian military largely withdrew from the north to focus on fighting the Ambazonian separatists.


More than 30,000 people in northern Cameroon fled to Chad after ethnic clashes over 
 between 
 fishermen and ethnic 
 herders in December 2021.


The 
 is elected and creates policy, administers government agencies, commands the 
, negotiates and ratifies treaties, and declares a state of emergency.
 The president appoints government officials at all levels, from the 
 (considered the official head of government), to the provincial governors and divisional officers.
 The president is selected by popular vote every seven years.
 There have been 2 presidents since the independence of Cameroon.

The 
 makes legislation. The body consists of 180 members who are elected for five-year terms and meet three times per year.
 Laws are passed on a majority vote.
 The 1996 constitution establishes a second house of parliament, the 100-seat 
. The government recognises the authority of traditional chiefs, fons, and 
 to govern at the local level and to resolve disputes as long as such rulings do not conflict with national law.


Cameroon's legal system is a mixture of 
, 
, and 
.
 Although nominally independent, the judiciary falls under the authority of the executive's 
.
 The president appoints judges at all levels.
 The judiciary is officially divided into tribunals, the 
, and the 
. The National Assembly elects the members of a nine-member 
 that judges high-ranking members of government in the event they are charged with high treason or harming national security.


Cameroon 
 at all levels of government. In 1997, Cameroon established anti-corruption bureaus in 29 ministries, but only 25% became operational,
 and in 2012, 
 placed Cameroon at number 144 on a list of 176 countries ranked from least to most corrupt.
 On 18 January 2006, Biya initiated an anti-corruption drive under the direction of the 
.
 There are several high corruption risk areas in Cameroon, for instance, customs, public health sector and public procurement.
 However, the corruption has gotten worse, regardless of the existing anti-corruption bureaus, as Transparency International ranked Cameroon 152 on a list of 180 countries in 2018.


President Biya's 
 (CPDM) was the only legal political party until December 1990. Numerous regional political groups have since formed. The primary opposition is the 
 (SDF), based largely in the Anglophone region of the country and headed by 
.


Biya and his party have maintained control of the presidency and the National Assembly in national elections, which rivals contend were unfair.
 Human rights organisations allege that the government suppresses the freedoms of opposition groups by preventing demonstrations, disrupting meetings, and arresting opposition leaders and journalists.
 In particular, English-speaking people are discriminated against; protests often escalate into violent clashes and killings.
 In 2017, President Biya shut down the Internet in the English-speaking region for 94 days, at the cost of hampering five million people, including 
 startups.


 ranks Cameroon as "not free" in terms of political rights and civil liberties.
 The last 
 were held on 9 February 2020.


Cameroon is a member of both the 
 and 
.

Its 
 closely follows that of its main ally, France (one of its former colonial rulers).
 Cameroon relies heavily on France for its defence,
 although military spending is high in comparison to other sectors of government.


President Biya has engaged in a decades-long clash with the government of Nigeria over possession of the oil-rich 
 peninsula.
 Cameroon and Nigeria share a 1,000-mile (1,600 km) border and have disputed the sovereignty of the Bakassi peninsula. In 1994 Cameroon petitioned the 
 to resolve the dispute. The two countries attempted to establish a cease-fire in 1996; however, fighting continued for years. In 2002, the ICJ ruled that the 
 gave sovereignty to Cameroon. The ruling called for a withdrawal by both countries and denied the request by Cameroon for compensation due to Nigeria's long-term occupation.
 By 2004, Nigeria had failed to meet the deadline to hand over the peninsula. A UN-mediated summit in June 2006 facilitated an agreement for Nigeria to withdraw from the region and both leaders signed the 
.
 The withdrawal and handover of control was completed by August 2006.


In July 2019, UN ambassadors of 37 countries, including Cameroon, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC defending 
's 
 in the 
 region.


The Cameroon Armed Forces, (French: 
, FAC) consists of the country's army (
), the country's navy (
 (MNR), includes naval infantry), the Cameroonian Air Force (
, AAC), and the 
.


Males and females that are 18 years of age up to 23 years of age and have graduated high school are eligible for military service. Those who join are obliged to complete 4 years of service. There is no conscription in Cameroon, but the government makes periodic calls for volunteers.


Human rights organisations accuse police and military forces of mistreating and even torturing criminal suspects, ethnic minorities, 
, and political activists.
 
 figures indicate that more than 21,000 people have fled to neighboring countries, while 160,000 have been internally displaced by the violence, many reportedly hiding in forests.
 Prisons are overcrowded with little access to adequate food and medical facilities,
 and prisons run by traditional rulers in the north are charged with holding political opponents at the behest of the government.
 However, since the first decade of the 21st century, an increasing number of police and gendarmes have been prosecuted for improper conduct.

On 25 July 2018, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 
 expressed deep concern about reports of violations and abuses in the English-speaking Northwest and Southwest regions of Cameroon.


 are banned by section 347-1 of the penal code with a penalty of from 6 months up to 5 years' imprisonment.


Since December 2020, 
 claimed that Islamist armed group Boko Haram has stepped up attacks and killed at least 80 civilians in towns and villages in the Far North region of Cameroon.


The 
 divides Cameroon into 10 semi-autonomous regions, each under the administration of an elected 
. Each region is headed by a presidentially appointed governor.


These leaders are charged with implementing the will of the president, reporting on the general mood and conditions of the regions, administering the civil service, keeping the peace, and overseeing the heads of the smaller administrative units. Governors have broad powers: they may order propaganda in their area and call in the army, 
, and police.
 All local government officials are employees of the central government's Ministry of Territorial Administration, from which local governments also get most of their budgets.


The regions are subdivided into 58 divisions (French 
). These are headed by presidentially appointed divisional officers (
). The divisions are further split into sub-divisions (
), headed by assistant divisional officers (
). The districts, administered by district heads (
), are the smallest administrative units.


The three northernmost regions are the 
 (
), 
 (
), and 
 (
). Directly south of them are the 
 (
) and 
 (
). The 
 (
) lies on the Gulf of Guinea and the southern border. Cameroon's western region is split into four smaller regions: the 
 (
) and 
 (
) regions are on the coast, and the 
 (
) and 
 (
) regions are in the western grassfields.


At 475,442 square kilometres (183,569 sq mi), Cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest country.
 The country is located in 
 and West Africa, known as the hinge of Africa, on the 
, part of the 
 and the Atlantic Ocean.
 Cameroon lies between latitudes 
 and 
, and longitudes 
 and 
. Cameroon controls 12 nautical miles of the Atlantic Ocean.

Tourist literature describes Cameroon as "Africa in miniature" because it exhibits all major climates and vegetation of the continent: coast, desert, mountains, rainforest, and savanna.
 The country's neighbours are Nigeria and the 
 to the west; 
 to the northeast; the 
 to the east; and 
, 
 and the 
 to the south.


Cameroon is divided into five major geographic zones distinguished by dominant physical, climatic, and vegetative features. The coastal plain extends 15 to 150 kilometres (9 to 93 mi) inland from the Gulf of Guinea
 and has an average elevation of 90 metres (295 ft).
 Exceedingly hot and humid with a short 
, this belt is densely forested and includes some of the 
 on earth, part of the 
.


The 
 rises from the coastal plain to an average elevation of 650 metres (2,133 ft).
 Equatorial rainforest dominates this region, although its alternation between 
 and dry seasons makes it less humid than the coast. This area is part of the 
 
.


An irregular chain of mountains, hills, and plateaus known as the 
 extends from 
 on the coast—Cameroon's highest point at 4,095 metres (13,435 ft)
—almost to 
 at Cameroon's northern border at 13°05'N. This region has a mild climate, particularly on the 
, although rainfall is high. Its soils are among Cameroon's most fertile, especially around volcanic Mount Cameroon.
 Volcanism here has created 
. On 21 August 1986, one of these, 
, belched carbon dioxide and killed between 1,700 and 2,000 people.
 This area has been delineated by the 
 as the 
 ecoregion.


The southern plateau rises northward to the grassy, rugged 
. This feature stretches from the western mountain area and forms a barrier between the country's north and south. Its average elevation is 1,100 metres (3,609 ft),
 and its average temperature ranges from 22 °C (71.6 °F) to 25 °C (77 °F) with high rainfall between April and October peaking in July and August.
 The 
 extends from the edge of the Adamawa to Lake Chad with an average elevation of 300 to 350 metres (984 to 1,148 ft).
 Its characteristic vegetation is savanna scrub and grass. This is an arid region with sparse rainfall and high median temperatures.


Cameroon has four patterns of drainage. In the south, the principal rivers are the 
, 
, 
, and Wouri. These flow southwestward or westward directly into the Gulf of Guinea. The 
 and 
 drain southeastward into the 
. In northern Cameroon, the 
 runs north and west and empties into the 
. The 
 flows northward into Lake Chad, which Cameroon shares with three neighbouring countries.


Cameroon's per capita GDP (
) was estimated as US$3,700 in 2017. Major 
 markets include the Netherlands, France, China, Belgium, Italy, Algeria, and Malaysia.


Cameroon has had a decade of strong economic performance, with GDP growing at an average of 4% per year. During the 2004–2008 period, public debt was reduced from over 60% of GDP to 10% and official reserves quadrupled to over US$3 billion.
 Cameroon is part of the 
 (of which it is the dominant economy),
 the 
 (UDEAC) and the 
 (OHADA).
 Its currency is the 
.


Unemployment was estimated at 3.38% in 2019,
 and 23.8% of the population was living below the international 
 of US$1.90 a day in 2014.
 Since the late 1980s, Cameroon has been following programmes advocated by the 
 and 
 (IMF) to reduce poverty, privatise industries, and increase economic growth.
 The government has taken measures to encourage 
 in the country.


An estimated 70% of the population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 16.7% of GDP in 2017.
 Most agriculture is done at the subsistence scale by local farmers using simple tools. They sell their surplus produce, and some maintain separate fields for commercial use. Urban centres are particularly reliant on peasant agriculture for their foodstuffs. Soils and climate on the coast encourage extensive commercial cultivation of bananas, cocoa, oil palms, rubber, and tea. Inland on the South Cameroon Plateau, cash crops include coffee, sugar, and tobacco. Coffee is a major cash crop in the western highlands, and in the north, natural conditions favour crops such as cotton, groundnuts, and rice. Production of 
 was initiated in Cameroon in 2004.


Livestock are raised throughout the country.
 Fishing employs 5,000 people and provides over 100,000 tons of seafood each year.
 
, long a staple food for rural Cameroonians, is today a delicacy in the country's urban centres. The commercial bushmeat trade has now surpassed deforestation as the main threat to wildlife in Cameroon.


The southern rainforest has vast timber reserves, estimated to cover 37% of Cameroon's total land area.
 However, large areas of the forest are difficult to reach. Logging, largely handled by foreign-owned firms,
 provides the government US$60 million a year in taxes (as of 1998
), and laws mandate the safe and sustainable exploitation of timber. Nevertheless, in practice, the industry is one of the least regulated in Cameroon.


Factory-based industry accounted for an estimated 26.5% of GDP in 2017.
 More than 75% of Cameroon's industrial strength is located in 
 and 
. Cameroon possesses substantial mineral resources, but these are not extensively mined (see 
).
 Petroleum exploitation has fallen since 1986, but this is still a substantial sector such that dips in prices have a strong effect on the economy.
 Rapids and waterfalls obstruct the southern rivers, but these sites offer opportunities for hydroelectric development and supply most of Cameroon's energy. The Sanaga River powers the largest hydroelectric station, located at Edéa. The rest of Cameroon's energy comes from oil-powered thermal engines. Much of the country remains without reliable power supplies.


 is often difficult. Only 6.6% of the roadways are tarred.
 Roadblocks often serve little other purpose than to allow police and gendarmes to collect bribes from travellers.
 Road banditry has long hampered transport along the eastern and western borders, and since 2005, the problem has intensified in the east as the 
 has further destabilised.


 run by multiple private companies connect all major cities. They are the most popular means of transportation followed by the rail service 
. Rail service runs from 
 in the west to 
 in the east and north to 
.
 International airports are located in 
 and 
, with a third under construction in 
.
 Douala is the country's principal seaport.
 In the north, the Bénoué River is seasonally navigable from Garoua across into Nigeria.


Although press freedoms have improved since the first decade of the 21st century, the press is corrupt and beholden to special interests and political groups.
 Newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals.
 The major radio and television stations are state-run and other 
, such as land-based telephones and telegraphs, are largely under government control.
 However, cell phone networks and Internet providers have increased dramatically since the first decade of the 21st century
 and are largely unregulated.


The population of Cameroon was 27,198,628 in 2021.
 The life expectancy was 62.3 years (60.6 years for males and 64 years for females).


Cameroon has slightly more women (50.5%) than men (49.5%). Over 60% of the population is under age 25. People over 65 years of age account for only 3.11% of the total population.


Cameroon's population is almost evenly divided between urban and rural dwellers.
 Population density is highest in the large urban centres, the western highlands, and the northeastern plain.
 Douala, Yaoundé, and 
 are the largest cities. In contrast, the Adamawa Plateau, southeastern Bénoué depression, and most of the South Cameroon Plateau are sparsely populated.


According to the 
, the 
 was 4.8 in 2013 with a population growth rate of 2.56%.


People from the overpopulated western highlands and the underdeveloped north are moving to the coastal plantation zone and urban centres for employment.
 Smaller movements are occurring as workers seek employment in lumber mills and plantations in the south and east.
 Although the national sex ratio is relatively even, these out-migrants are primarily males, which leads to unbalanced ratios in some regions.


Both 
 and 
 marriage are practised, and the average Cameroonian family is large and extended.
 In the north, women tend to the home, and men herd cattle or work as farmers. In the south, women grow the family's food, and men provide meat and grow cash crops. Cameroonian society is male-dominated, and violence and discrimination against women is common.


The number of distinct ethnic and linguistic groups in Cameroon is estimated to be between 230 and 282.
 The Adamawa Plateau broadly bisects these into northern and southern divisions. The northern peoples are 
 groups, who live in the central highlands and the northern lowlands, and the 
, who are spread throughout northern Cameroon. A small number of 
 Arabs live near Lake Chad. Southern Cameroon is inhabited by speakers of 
 and 
 languages. Bantu-speaking groups inhabit the coastal and equatorial zones, while speakers of Semi-Bantu languages live in the Western grassfields. Some 5,000 Gyele and Baka 
 roam the southeastern and coastal rainforests or live in small, roadside settlements.
 Nigerians make up the largest group of foreign nationals.


In 2007, Cameroon hosted approximately 97,400 refugees and asylum seekers. Of these, 49,300 were from the Central African Republic (many driven west by war),
 41,600 from 
, and 2,900 from 
.
 Kidnappings of Cameroonian citizens by Central African bandits have increased since 2005.


In the first months of 2014, thousands of refugees fleeing the violence in the 
 arrived in Cameroon.


On 4 June 2014, AlertNet reported:

Almost 90,000 people have fled to neighbouring Cameroon since December and up to 2,000 a week, mostly women and children, are still crossing the border, the United Nations said.

"Women and children are arriving in Cameroon in a shocking state, after weeks, sometimes months, on the road, foraging for food," said 
, executive director of the 
 (WFP).


Both English and French are official languages, although French is by far the most understood language (more than 80%).
 German, the language of the original colonisers, has long since been displaced by French and English. 
 is the lingua franca in the formerly British-administered territories.
 A mixture of English, French, and Pidgin called 
 has been gaining popularity in urban centres since the mid-1970s.
 The government encourages bilingualism in English and French, and as such, official government documents, new legislation, ballots, among others, are written and provided in both languages. As part of the initiative to encourage bilingualism in Cameroon, six of the eight universities in the country are entirely bilingual.


In addition to the colonial languages, there are approximately 250 other languages spoken by nearly 20 million Cameroonians.
 It is because of this that Cameroon is considered one of the most linguistically diverse countries in the world.


Many Memorandums of Understanding have been signed with Germany for the study of German, which still enjoys huge popularity among pupils and students, with 300,000 people learning or speaking German in Cameroon in 2010. Today, Cameroon is one of the African countries with the highest number of people with knowledge of German.


In the northern regions of the 
, the 
, and 
, the Fulani language 
 is the lingua franca with French merely serving as an administrative language. However, 
 in the Far North region's department of 
 acts as the lingua franca irrespective of ethnic groups.


In 2017 there were language protests by the anglophone population against perceived oppression by francophone speakers.
 The military was deployed against the protesters and people were killed, hundreds imprisoned and thousands fled the country.
 This culminated in the declaration of an independent 
,
 which has since evolved into the 
.
 It is estimated that by June 2020, 740,000 people had been internally displaced as a result of this crisis.


Cameroon has a high level of 
 and diversity.
 The predominant faith is 
, practised by about two-thirds of the population, while 
 is a significant minority faith, adhered to by about one-fourth. In addition, traditional faiths are practised by many. Muslims are most concentrated in the north, while Christians are concentrated primarily in the southern and western regions, but practitioners of both faiths can be found throughout the country.
 Large cities have significant populations of both groups.
 Muslims in Cameroon are divided into 
, 
,
 
, and 
.


People from the North-West and South-West provinces, which used to be a part of 
, have the highest proportion of Protestants. The French-speaking regions of the southern and western regions are largely Catholic.
 Southern ethnic groups predominantly follow Christian or traditional African 
 beliefs, or a 
 combination of the two. People widely believe in witchcraft, and the government outlaws such practices.
 Suspected witches are often subject to mob violence.
 The Islamist jihadist group 
 has been reported as operating in North Cameroon.


In the northern regions, the locally dominant 
 ethnic group is mostly Muslim, but the overall population is fairly evenly divided among Muslims, Christians, and followers of indigenous religious beliefs (called 
 ("pagan") by the Fulani).
 The 
 ethnic group of the West Region is largely Muslim.
 Native traditional religions are practised in rural areas throughout the country but rarely are practised publicly in cities, in part because many indigenous religious groups are intrinsically local in character.


In 2013, the total adult 
 rate of Cameroon was estimated to be 71.3%. Among youths age 15–24 the literacy rate was 85.4% for males and 76.4% for females.
 Most children have access to state-run schools that are cheaper than private and religious facilities.
 The educational system is a mixture of British and French precedents
 with most instruction in English or French.


Cameroon has one of the highest school attendance rates in Africa.
 Girls attend school less regularly than boys do because of cultural attitudes, domestic duties, early marriage, pregnancy, and sexual harassment. Although attendance rates are higher in the south,
 a disproportionate number of teachers are stationed there, leaving northern schools chronically understaffed.
 In 2013, the primary school enrollment rate was 93.5%.


School attendance in Cameroon is also affected by 
. Indeed, the 
 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor reported that 56% of children aged 5 to 14 were working children and that almost 53% of children aged 7 to 14 combined work and school.
 In December 2014, a 
 issued by the 
 mentioned Cameroon among the countries that resorted to child labor in the production of cocoa.


The quality of health care is generally low.
 Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 56 years in 2012, with 48 healthy life years expected.
 Fertility rate remains high in Cameroon with an average of 4.8 births per woman and an average mother's age of 19.7 years old at first birth.
 In Cameroon, there is only one doctor for every 5,000 people, according to the World Health Organization.
 In 2014, just 4.1% of total GDP expenditure was allocated to healthcare.
 Due to financial cuts in the health care system, there are few professionals. Doctors and nurses who were trained in Cameroon, emigrate because in Cameroon the payment is poor while the workload is high. Nurses are unemployed even though their help is needed. Some of them help out voluntarily so they will not lose their skills.
 Outside the major cities, facilities are often dirty and poorly equipped.


In 2012, the top three deadly diseases were 
, 
, and 
 diseases.
 Endemic diseases include 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 The 
/
 prevalence rate in 2016 was estimated at 3.8% for those aged 15–49,
 although a strong stigma against the illness keeps the number of reported cases artificially low.
 46,000 children under age 14 were estimated to be living with HIV in 2016. In Cameroon, 58% of those living with HIV know their status, and just 37% receive 
 treatment. In 2016, 29,000 deaths due to AIDS occurred in both adults and children.


, a traditional practice that is prevalent in Cameroon, may affect girls' health.
 
 (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced among some populations; according to a 2013 UNICEF report,
 1% of women in Cameroon have undergone FGM. Also impacting women and girls' health, the contraceptive prevalence rate is estimated to be just 34.4% in 2014. 
 remain a popular alternative to 
.


 and 
 are integral parts of Cameroonian ceremonies, festivals, social gatherings, and storytelling.
 Traditional dances are highly choreographed and separate men and women or forbid participation by one sex altogether.
 The dances' purposes range from pure entertainment to religious devotion.
 Traditionally, music is transmitted orally. In a typical performance, a chorus of singers echoes a soloist.


Musical accompaniment may be as simple as clapping hands and stamping feet,
 but traditional instruments include bells worn by dancers, clappers, drums and 
, flutes, horns, rattles, scrapers, stringed instruments, whistles, and xylophones; combinations of these vary by ethnic group and region. Some performers sing complete songs alone, accompanied by a harplike instrument.


Popular music styles include 
 of the coast, 
 of the Bassa, 
 of the 
, and 
 of the Bamileke.
 
 has influenced Anglophone Cameroonian performers, and 
's 
 hit "
" is the top-selling African record in history.


The two most popular music styles are 
 and 
. Makossa developed in Douala and mixes folk music, highlife, 
, and 
. Performers such as 
, 
, 
, and 
 popularised the style worldwide in the 1970s and 1980s. Bikutsi originated as war music among the Ewondo. Artists such as 
 developed it into a popular dance music beginning in the 1940s, and performers such as 
 and 
 popularised it internationally during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.


The most notable holiday associated with patriotism in Cameroon is 
, also called Unity Day. Among the most notable religious holidays are 
, and 
, which is typically 39 days after Easter. In the Northwest and Southwest provinces, collectively called 
, October 1 is considered a national holiday, a date Ambazonians consider the day of their independence from Cameroon.


 varies by region, but a large, one-course, evening meal is common throughout the country. A typical dish is based on cocoyams, 
, 
 (manioc), 
, 
, 
, 
, or 
, often pounded into dough-like 
. This is served with a sauce, soup, or stew made from greens, 
, 
, or other ingredients.
 Meat and fish are popular but expensive additions, with chicken often reserved for special occasions.
 Dishes are often quite spicy; seasonings include salt, red pepper sauce, and 
.


Cutlery is common, but food is traditionally manipulated with the right hand. Breakfast consists of leftovers of bread and fruit with 
 or 
. Generally breakfast is made from wheat flour in various different foods such as puff-puff (doughnuts), accra banana made from 
 and flour, bean cakes, and many more. Snacks are popular, especially in larger towns where they may be bought from 
.


Water, 
, and 
 are the traditional mealtime drinks, although beer, soda, and wine have gained popularity. 33 Export beer is the official drink of the 
 and one of the most popular brands, joining Castel, 
, and 
.


Cameroon's relatively large and diverse population is likewise diverse in its fashions. Climate, religious, ethnic and cultural beliefs, and the influences of colonialism, imperialism, and globalization are all factors in contemporary Cameroonian dress.

Notable articles of clothing include: 
, 
 worn by Cameroon women; 
, a traditional hat; kwa, a male handbag; and 
, male custom attire.

Wrappers and 
 are used extensively by both women and men but their use varies by region, with influences from 
 styles more present in the north and 
 and 
 styles more often in the south and west.


 is one of Cameroon's top fashion designers and has received international recognition.


Traditional arts and crafts are practiced throughout the country for commercial, decorative, and religious purposes. Woodcarvings and sculptures are especially common.
 The high-quality clay of the western highlands is used for pottery and ceramics.
 Other crafts include 
, 
, brass and bronze working, 
 carving and painting, 
, and 
 working. Traditional housing styles use local materials and vary from temporary wood-and-leaf shelters of nomadic 
 to the rectangular mud-and-thatch homes of southern peoples. Dwellings of materials such as cement and tin are increasingly common.
 
 is mainly promoted by independent cultural organizations (
, 
) and 
 (
, 
, 
).


Cameroonian literature has concentrated on both European and African themes. Colonial-era writers such as 
 and 
 were educated by European missionary societies and advocated 
 into European culture to bring Cameroon into the modern world.
 After 
, writers such as 
 and 
 analysed and criticised colonialism and rejected assimilation.


Shortly after independence, filmmakers such as 
 and 
 explored similar themes.
 In the 1960s, 
, 
 and other writers explored postcolonialism, problems of African development, and the recovery of African identity.
 In the mid-1970s, filmmakers such as 
 and 
 dealt with the conflicts between traditional and postcolonial society. Literature and films during the next two decades focused more on wholly Cameroonian themes.


National policy strongly advocates sport in all forms. Traditional sports include canoe racing and wrestling, and several hundred runners participate in the 40 km (25 mi) 
 each year.
 Cameroon is one of the few tropical countries to have 
 in the 
.

Sport in Cameroon is dominated by football. Amateur football clubs abound, organised along ethnic lines or under corporate sponsors. The 
 has been one of the most successful in Africa since its strong showing in the 
 and 
. Cameroon has won five 
 titles and the gold medal at the 
.


Cameroon was the host country of the 
 in November–December 2016,
 the 
 and the 
. The 
 is known as the "Indomitable Lionesses", and like their men's counterparts, are also successful at international stage, although it has not won any major trophy.

Cricket has also entered into Cameroon as an emerging sport with the Cameroon Cricket Federation participating in international matches 


Cameroon has produced multiple 
 players including 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


The current 
 
 hails from Cameroon.





The 
 (
 
) (
: 
; 
: 
) is the unit of 
 of 
. It is the fourth historical and only current 
 in the 
 of Ghana. One cedi is divided into one hundred pesewas (Gp).


After 
, Ghana separated itself from the 
, which was the currency of the British colonies in the region. The new republic's first independent currency was the 
 (1958–1965).  In 1965, Ghana decided to leave the British 
 
 and adopt the widely accepted 
 system. The African name Cedi (1965–1967) was introduced in place of the old 
. Ghana's first President Dr. 
 introduced Cedi notes and Pesewa coins in July 1965 to replace the Ghanaian pounds, 
 and pence. The cedi bore the portrait of the President and was equivalent to eight shillings and four pence (8s 4d), i.e. one hundred old pence, so that 1 pesewa was equal to one penny.

After the 
, the new leaders wanted to remove the face of Nkrumah from the banknotes. The "new cedi" (1967–2007) was worth 1.2 cedis, which made it equal to half of a pound sterling (or ten 
 sterling) at its introduction. Decades of high 
 devalued the new cedi, so that in 2007 the largest of the "new cedi" banknotes, the 20,000 note, had a value of about US$2. The new cedi was gradually phased out in 2007 in favor of the "Ghana cedi" at an exchange rate of 1:10,000. By removing four digits, the Ghana cedi became the highest-denominated 
. It has since lost over 90% of its value.

The word 
 is the 
 word for 
 shell. Cowries (plural of cowry) were formerly used as currency in what is now Ghana. The 
 or money cowry is not native to 
 waters but is a common species in the 
. The 
-like shells came to West Africa, beginning in the 14th century, through trade with 
 merchants. The first modern coins exclusively used at the Gold Coast were produced in 1796 but 
 were used alongside coins and gold dust as currency until 1901.


The first cedi was introduced in 1965, replacing the 
 at a rate of 2.4 cedi = 1 pound, or 1 pesewa = 1 penny. The first cedi was pegged to 
 at a rate of 2.4 cedis = 1 pound or 8s 4d per cedi.

The first cedi was replaced in 1967 by a "new cedi" which was worth 1.2 first cedis. This allowed a 
 conversion with the pound, namely 2 second cedis = 1 pound. The change also provided an opportunity to remove 
's image from coins and notes.

The second cedi was initially pegged to sterling at a rate of ₵2 = £1 stg. However, within months, the second cedi was devalued to a rate of ₵2.45 = £1 stg, less than the initial value of the first cedi. This rate was equivalent to ₵1 = 0.98 
 and the rate to the dollar was maintained when sterling was devalued in November 1967. Further pegs were set of $0.55 in 1971, $0.78 in 1972, and $0.8696 in 1973 before the currency was floated in 1978. High 
 ensued, and so the cedi was re-pegged at ₵2.80 = $1.00.

The cedi's value continued to be eaten away on the 
. In the early 1980s, the government started cracking down hard on the retail of products at prices other than the official established sale price (also known as 
). This had the effect of driving nearly all commerce underground, where 
 prices for commodities were the norm, and nothing existed on store shelves. By 1983 the cedi was worth about 120 to one 
 on the black market, a pack of cigarettes cost about ₵150 (if they could be found), but the bank rate continued at ₵2.80 = $1.00. Finally, with 
 completely drying up for all import transactions, the government was forced to begin a process of gradual devaluation, and a 
 of its strict price controls. This process ended in 1990 with a free float of the cedi against foreign currencies. Inflation continued (see the 
 chart) until by July 2007, one US dollar was worth about ₵9500, and a transition to the third cedi was initiated.

In 1979 a currency confiscation took place. New 
 were issued which were exchanged for old ones at a rate of 10 old notes for 7 new ones. Coins and bank accounts were unaffected.

A second confiscation took place in 1982, when the ₵50 note (the highest denomination) was demonetized. Ghanaians, in theory, could exchange any number of ₵50 notes for coins or other banknotes without loss, but foreigners could not make any exchange. However, many Ghanaians who were hoarding large amounts of cedis feared reprisal if they tried to convert all of it, and so simply burned a lot of their money. Many other Ghanaians received "promise payment notes" from the banks, but never received compensation. This 
 was publicly justified as a means to create a disincentive for the flourishing black market. However, from a monetary perspective, currency confiscations have the effect of reducing the available cash in the economy, and thereby slowing the rate of inflation. After the ₵50 note confiscation, the ₵20 note was the highest cedi denomination, but had a street value of only about $0.35 (U.S.)

After the ₵50 note 
, fears existed that the government could also confiscate the ₵20 or even the ₵10 notes. This fear, along with inflation running at about 100% annually, started causing Ghanaians to lose their faith in their country's own currency. Some transactions could only then be done in foreign currencies (although that was technically illegal), and other, more routine transactions began to revert to 
.

In 1991, 10, 20, 50, and 100 cedi coins were introduced, followed by 200 and 500 cedis in 1996. These six denominations were still in circulation until 2007. However, the 10 cedis (~0.1 
) and 20 cedis (~0.2 U.S. cents) coins were not seen much due to their small value.


Because of the rampant inflation in the decades before the exchange the second cedi was only worth a small fraction of its original value. 
 decided to "cut" four zeros off the currency by switching to the third cedi. The new currency was not introduced as the third cedi but is instead officially called the "Ghanaian cedi" (GH₵), in contrast to the second cedi that was officially known as the "new cedi". In the second half of 2007 both the second and third cedi were legal tender as the old currency was being gradually withdrawn. At the end of December 2007, more than 90% of all old coins and notes had been withdrawn.
 From January 2008 old banknotes could only be exchanged at banks and were no longer legal tender.


On 14 May 2010, a GH₵2 banknote was issued to meet public need for an intermediate denomination and reduce the frequency, and associated cost, of printing large volumes of the GH₵1 banknote. The introduction of the new denomination coincided with the conclusion of the year-long centenary celebrations of the birth of 
, Ghana's first president, and has the commemorative text "
 of the Birth of Dr. Kwame Nkrumah".


Due to periods of "sustained high inflation" and "perennial depreciation of the currency", the 
 on 29 November 2019, announced the issuance of a new 2-cedi coin and as well as new 100 and 200-cedi banknotes. Existing 1 and 2 cedi banknotes remain legal tender, though these denominations will be gradually replaced by coins to reduce costs.

The third Cedi has been losing value continuously since it was introduced. In 2014, the inflation rose rapidly as the value of the third cedi fell to a fourth of its original value.
 The devaluation was temporarily halted in the last quarter of 2014 as the currency stabilized due to a pending IMF bailout of Ghana.


Due to its negligible purchasing power, the one pesewa coin is rarely seen in circulation. In September 2021, the Bank of Ghana began the process of withdrawing GH₵1 and GH₵2 notes from circulation to encourage the use of coins of their corresponding face values.


In August 2022, accelerating inflation and continued economic mismanagement has caused the cedi's value to drop to 10 U.S. cents (GH₵10 = US$1).
 As of September 2022
, the annual inflation rate of 37.2% as reported by the Ghana Statistical Service was the highest since 2001.


By October 2022, the cedi became the world's worst performing currency, having lost 60% of its value relative to the U.S. dollar since the end of 2021.
 The exchange rate as of 24 October 2022
 was about GH₵15 per U.S. dollar.


The 
 has been issuing all Ghanaian coins since 1958.
 Beside the coins in general circulation the bank have also issued commemorative coins
 These special coins have been issued in shillings (1958), crowns (1965), pounds (1958–1977), sikas (1997–2003) and cedis (2013-).
 It is unclear if the Bank of Ghana considered commemorative crowns and sikas together with  the commemorative pounds that were coined after 1965 as legal tender or simply as medallions.


Only coins that have been or are in general circulation are included in this list. The years of issue does not indicated that the series have been coined every year in the period but that the coin has been issued more than once in the stated period. Some coins are held back and released years after they are issued. This means that in the general circulation there are worn out coins and coins in mint condition from the same issuing year. The Bank of Ghana has never stated if they are simply holding back already stamped coins until they are needed or if they are stamping coins successively with old issue years.

The new coins are 1 pesewa (100 old cedi), 5 pesewas (500), 10 pesewas (1,000), 20 pesewas (2,000), 50 pesewas (5,000), 1 cedi (10,000) and 2 cedis (20,000).


The 
 has been issuing all Ghanaian banknotes since 1958.
 Most of the Ghanaian banknotes have been changed slightly from one year's issue to the next year's issue in the ongoing technological 
. The signature on the notes also changes when a new governor takes over the management of the Bank of Ghana.
 Such changes are frequent and are not covered in this list. The years of issue do not indicate that the series has been printed every year in the period, but that the banknote has been issued more than once in the given period.




 (
; 
: 
, 
: 
), officially the 
, is a country in 
.
 It abuts the 
 and the 
 to the south, sharing borders with 
 in 
, 
 in 
, and 
 in 
.
 Ghana covers an area of 238,535 km
 (92,099 sq mi), spanning diverse biomes that range from coastal savannas to tropical rainforests. With nearly 31 million inhabitants (according to 2021 census), Ghana is the 
 in West Africa, after 
.
 The capital and 
 is 
; other major cities are 
, 
, and 
.

The first permanent state in present-day Ghana was the 
 of the 11th century.
 Numerous kingdoms and empires emerged over the centuries, of which the most powerful were the 
 in the north
 and the 
 in the south.
 Beginning in the 15th century, the 
, followed by numerous other European powers, contested the area for trading rights, until the 
 ultimately established control of the coast by the late 19th century. Following over a century of colonisation, Ghana's current borders took shape, encompassing four separate British colonial territories: 
, 
, the 
, and 
. These were unified as an independent dominion within the 
 on 6 March 1957, becoming the first colony in West Africa to achieve sovereignty.
 Ghana subsequently became influential in 
 and the 
.


Ghana is a multi-ethnic country with a diverse population, linguistic and religious groups;
 while the 
 are the largest ethnic group, they constitute only a plurality. Most 
 are 
 (71.3%); almost a fifth are 
; a tenth practise traditional faiths or report no religion.
 Ghana is a 
 
 led by a president who is both 
 and 
.
 Ghana has maintained since 1993 one of the freest and most stable governments on the continent, and it performs relatively well in healthcare, economic growth, and human development,
 so that it has a significant influence in West Africa
 and is highly integrated in international affairs, being a member of the 
, the 
, the 
, the 
, and the 
.


 means "strong warrior king" and was the title accorded to the kings of the medieval 
 in 
—not to be confused with today's Ghana, for the empire was further north, in modern-day 
, 
 and southern 
, as well as in 
.
 Ghana was known for its large gold usage and hence was named the 


Most of what is now Ghana was inhabited in the 
 and the 
 by different ethnic groups. The earliest known kingdoms to emerge in modern Ghana were the 
 states.
 The Mole-Dagomba came on horseback from present-day 
 under a single leader, 
.
 With their advanced weapons and based on a central authority, they easily invaded and occupied the lands of the local people ruled by the 
 (land god priests), established themselves as the rulers over the locals, and made 
 their capital.
 The death of Naa Gbewaa caused seccession among his children, some of whom broke off and founded separate states including 
 and 
. 
 Whiles Gbewaa was still alive, his daughter 
, travelled north and founded the 
, who constitute the majority of present day 
. Other kingdoms that emerged from 
 include the 
 of Ivory Coast, and the 
 of the 
.

Although the area of present-day Ghana has experienced many population movements, the 
-speaking peoples began to move into it toward the end of the 15th century.
 By the early 16th century, the Akans were firmly established in the Akan state called 
, for which the 
 was named.
 From the 17th century, Akans emerged from what is believed to have been the Bonoman area, to create several Akan states, mainly based on gold trading.
 These states included Bonoman (Brong-Ahafo region), Ashanti (
), 
 (
), 
 (
), and 
 
.
 By the 19th century, the territory of the southern part of Ghana was included in the 
, one of the influential states in sub-saharan Africa prior to the onset of colonialism.
 The government of the Ashanti Empire operated first as a loose network and eventually as a centralised kingdom with an advanced, highly specialised bureaucracy centred in the capital city of 
.
 Prior to Akan contact with Europeans, the Akan people created an advanced economy based on principally gold and 
 
 then traded with the states of Africa.


The Ga-Dangme and Ewe migrated westward from south-western Nigeria because of pressure from incessant tribal wars.The Ewe migrated with their other Gbe speaking kinsmen and in transition,settled in Ketou in Benin Republic, Tado in Togo and Nortsie in Togo as their final dispersal point. Their dispersal from Nortsie was necessitated by the high handed rule of King Agorkorli (Agor Akorlie). The Ga- Dangme occupy the Greater Accra Region and parts of the Eastern Region, while the Ewe are found in the 
 as well as the neighboring Togo, Benin and Nigeria ( around Badagry area).

Akan trade with European states began after contact with the 
 in the 15th century.
 Early European contact by the 
, who came to the 
 in the 15th century to trade and then established the 
 (Costa do Ouro), focused on the extensive availability of gold.
 The Portuguese built a trading lodge at a coastal settlement called Anomansah (the perpetual drink) which they renamed 
.
 In 1481, King 
 commissioned 
 to build the 
, which was completed in three years.
 By 1598, the 
 had joined the Portuguese in the gold trade, establishing the 
 (Nederlandse Bezittingen ter Kuste van Guinea) and building forts at 
 and Kormantsi.
 In 1617, the Dutch captured the Elmina Castle from the Portuguese and 
 in 1642 (
).


Other European traders had joined in gold trading by the mid-17th century, most notably the 
, establishing the 
 (Svenska Guldkusten), and 
, establishing the 
 (Danske Guldkyst 
 Dansk Guinea).
 In addition to the gold trade, European traders participated in the 
 in this area.
 More than 30 forts and castles were built by the merchants. The Germans also established the 
 
 Groß Friedrichsburg).
 In 1874, Great Britain established control over some parts of the country, assigning these areas the status of the 
.
 Many military engagements occurred between the British colonial powers and the various Akan nation-states. The Kingdom of Ashanti defeated the British a few times in the 100-year-long 
 but eventually lost with the 
 in 1900.


In 1947, the newly formed 
 led by 
 called for "self-government within the shortest possible time" following the 
.
 
, a Ghanaian nationalist who led Ghana from 1957 to 1966 as the country's first 
 and 
, formed the 
 in 1949 with the motto "self-government now".
 The party initiated a "positive action" campaign involving non-violent protests, strikes and non-cooperation with the British authorities. Nkrumah was arrested and sentenced to one year imprisonment during this time. In the Gold Coast's 
, he was elected to Parliament and released from prison to become leader of government business.
 He became the prime minister in 1952. He improved the infrastructure of the country, and his Africanisation policies created better career opportunities for Ghanaians.

On 6 March 1957 at midnight, the Gold Coast, Ashanti, the Northern Territories, and 
 were unified as one single independent dominion within the 
 under the name Ghana. This was done under the 
. The current 
, consisting of the colours red, gold, green, and a black star, dates back to this unification.
 It was designed by 
; the red represents the blood that was shed towards independence; the gold represents the 
 wealth of Ghana; the green symbolises the rich grasslands of Ghana, and the black star is the symbol of the Ghanaian people and African emancipation.


On 1 July 1960, following the 
 and 
, Nkrumah declared Ghana a republic and assumed the presidency.
 6 March is the nation's 
, and 1 July is celebrated as 
.
 At the time of independence Nkrumah declared, "My first objective is to abolish from Ghana poverty, ignorance, and disease. We shall measure our progress by the improvement in the health of our people; by the number of children in school, and by the quality of their education; by the availability of water and electricity in our towns and villages; and by the happiness which our people take in being able to manage their own affairs. The welfare of our people is our chief pride, and it is by this that my government will ask to be judged.".


Nkrumah led an 
 regime in Ghana, as he repressed political opposition and conducted elections that were not free and fair.
 In 1964, a 
 made Ghana a 
, with Nkrumah as 
 of both the nation and its party.


Nkrumah was the first African head of state to promote the concept of 
, which he had been introduced to during his studies at 
, Pennsylvania in the United States, at the time when 
 was popular for his "Back to Africa Movement".
 Nkrumah merged the teachings of Garvey, 
 and the naturalised Ghanaian scholar 
 into the formation of 1960s Ghana.
 Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, as he became known, played an instrumental part in the founding of the 
, and in establishing the 
 to teach his ideologies of 
 and 
.
 His life achievements were recognised by Ghanaians during his centenary birthday celebration, and the day was instituted as a 
 (
).


The government of Nkrumah was subsequently overthrown by a coup by the 
 codenamed "Operation Cold Chop". This occurred while Nkrumah was abroad with 
 in the People's Republic of China, on a fruitless mission to 
 in Vietnam to help end the 
. The coup took place on 24 February 1966, led by Colonel 
 and Brigadier Akwasi Afrifa. The 
 was formed, chaired by Lieutenant General 
.


A series of alternating military and civilian governments, often affected by economic instabilities,
 ruled Ghana from 1966 to 1981, ending with the ascension to power of 
 
 of the 
 in 1981.
 These changes resulted in the suspension of the 
 in 1981 and the banning of 
.
 The economy soon declined, so Rawlings negotiated a structural adjustment plan, changing many old economic policies, and economic growth recovered during the mid-1980s.
 A new constitution restoring 
 politics was promulgated in the 
; Rawlings was elected as president of Ghana then, and again in the 
.


At least 1,000 and as many as 2,000 people were killed during the 
 between the 
 and other ethnic groups such as the Nanumba, 
 and 
, while 150,000 people were displaced as part of the tribal war in 
 in 1994.


Winning the 
, 
 of the 
 was sworn into office as president of Ghana on 7 January 2001 and attained the presidency again in the 
, thus also serving two terms (the term limit) as president of Ghana and thus marking the first time under the fourth republic that power was transferred from one legitimately elected head of state and head of government to another.


Nana Akufo-Addo, the ruling party candidate, was defeated in a very close election by 
 of the 
 following the 
.
 Mills died of natural causes and was succeeded by Vice President 
 on 24 July 2012.
 Following the 
, Mahama became president, 
 and Ghana was a stable democracy.
 As a result of the 
,
 
 became president on 7 January 2017.
 He was re-elected after a tightly contested 
.


On 11 June 2021, Ghana inaugurated Green Ghana Day in an aim of planting 5 million trees in a concentrating effort to preserve the country's cover of rainforest to combat deforestation.


Ghana is located on the 
, only a few degrees north of the 
, therefore giving it a warm climate.
 Ghana spans an area of 238,535 km
 (92,099 sq mi) and has an Atlantic coastline that stretches 560 kilometres (350 miles) on the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean to its south.
 
 and 
 are near the south coast.
 It lies between latitudes 4°45'N and 11°N, and longitudes 1°15'E and 3°15'W. The 
 passes through Ghana, specifically through 
.
 Ghana is geographically closer to the "centre" of the Earth than any other country, since the notional centre, (0°, 0°) is located in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 614 km (382 mi) off the south-east coast of Ghana.

Grasslands mixed with south coastal shrublands and forests dominate Ghana, with forest extending northward from the coast 320 kilometres (200 miles) and eastward for a maximum of about 270 kilometres (170 miles) with several locations for mining of industrial minerals and timber.
 Ghana is home to five terrestrial ecoregions: 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 It had a 2018 
 mean score of 4.53/10, ranking it 112th globally out of 172 countries.



The 
 River and its tributary 
, flow south through Ghana to 
, the world's 
 and largest by surface area, formed by the hydroelectric 
,
 completed in 1965. The Volta flows out of Lake Volta into the Gulf of Guinea.
 The northernmost part of Ghana is Pulmakong and the southernmost part of Ghana is 
.
Volta Region: Longest mountain range in Ghana-Akwapim Togo ranges 

Mt Afadja- highest mountain in Ghana 

Wli waterfall- the highest waterfall in Ghana 

Amedzofe- Mt Gemi- waterfall and canopy walk.

Golden sandy beaches stretching from Anyanui to Aflao 

Aflao: the eastern gateway to Ghana and bordering Lome, the Togolese capital 

Keta- Fort Prizenstein, the former Danish slave trading post. Site of proposed Keta Port. The town with the most promising and expanding tourism potential in Ghana 

The 
 is 
, and there are two main seasons: the 
 and the 
.
 Ghana sits at the intersection of three hydro-climatic zones.
 Changes in rainfall, weather conditions and sea-level rise affect the salinity of coastal waters. This is expected to negatively affect both farming and fisheries.
 The national economy stands to suffer from the impacts of climate change because of its dependence on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, energy, and forestry. Moreover, access to fresh water is expected to become more challenging, and reduced water supply will have a negative impact on hydropower, which provides 54% of the country's electricity capacity. Additionally, Ghana will probably see more cases of 
 and 
, since both are impacted by changes in water conditions.

In 2015, the government produced a document titled "Ghana's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution."
 Following that, Ghana signed the Paris Climate Agreement in 2016.

Ghana is a 
 
 
 with a parliamentary 
 that is dominated by two parties—the National Democratic Congress (NDC) and the New Patriotic Party (NPP). Ghana alternated between civilian and military governments until January 1993, when the military government gave way to the Fourth Republic of Ghana after 
 and 
 in late 1992. The 1992 
 divides powers among a 
 of the 
 (
), parliament (
), cabinet (
), council of state (
), and an independent judiciary (
). The government is elected by 
 after every four years.


 won the presidency in the 
, defeating incumbent 
. He also won the 
 after the presidential election results were challenged at the Supreme Court by flagbearer of the NDC, John Mahama. Presidents are limited to two four-year terms in office. The president can serve a second term only upon re-election.

The 2012 
 indicated that Ghana is ranked the 67th-least fragile state in the world and the fifth-least fragile state in Africa. Ghana ranked 112th out of 177 countries on the index.
 Ghana ranked as the 64th-least corrupt and politically corrupt country in the world out of all 174 countries ranked and ranked as the fifth-least corrupt and politically corrupt country in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 
.
 Ghana was ranked 7th in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 
. The Ibrahim Index is a comprehensive measure of African government, based on variables which reflect the success with which governments deliver essential political goods to its citizens.


Since independence, Ghana has been devoted to ideals of nonalignment and is a founding member of the 
. Ghana favours international and regional political and economic co-operation, and is an active member of the United Nations and the African Union.


Ghana has a strong relationship with the United States. Three recent U.S. presidents—
, 
, and 
—made diplomatic trips to Ghana. Many Ghanaian diplomats and politicians hold positions in international organisations, including Ghanaian diplomat and former 
 
, 
 Judge 
, as well as former President 
 and former President 
, who both served as diplomats of the United Nations.


In September 2010, President 
 visited China on an official visit. Mills and China's former President 
 marked the 50th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two nations, at the 
.
 China reciprocated with an official visit in November 2011, by the vice-chairman of the 
, 
 who visited Ghana and met with Ghana's President 
.
 Iranian President 
 met with Mahama in 2013 to hold discussions on strengthening the 
 and also co–chair a bilateral meeting between Ghana and Iran at the Ghanaian 
 
.


The 
 were integrated into Ghana's development agenda and the budget. According to reports, the SDGs were implemented through a decentralized planning approach. This allows stakeholders' participations such as UN agencies, traditional leaders, civil society organizations, academia, and others.
 The 17 SDGs are a global call to action to end poverty among others, and the UN and its partners in the country are working towards achieving them.
 According to the President 
, Ghana was "the first sub-Saharan African country to achieve the goal of halving poverty, as contained in Goal 1 of the 
"


In 1957, the 
 (GAF) consisted of its headquarters, support services, three battalions of infantry and a reconnaissance squadron with armoured vehicles.
 President Nkrumah aimed at rapidly expanding the GAF to support the 
 ambitions. Thus, in 1961, 4th and 5th Battalions were established, and in 1964 6th Battalion was established, from a 
 
 originally raised in 1963.
 Today, Ghana is a 
 and 
.
 In his book 
, 
 commander 
 highly rated the GAF soldiers and military personnel.


The 
 and 
 of the GAF are conceptualised in the constitution, Ghana's Law on Armed Force Military Strategy, and 
 agreements to which GAF is attestator.
 GAF military operations are executed under the auspices and imperium of the 
.
 Although Ghana is relatively peaceful and is often considered being one of the least violent countries in the region, Ghana has experienced political violence in the past and 2017 has thus far seen an upward trend in incidents motivated by political grievances.


The 
 and the 
 are the main law enforcement agencies, responsible for the detection of crime, maintenance of law and order and the maintenance of internal peace and security.
 The Ghana Police Service has eleven specialised police units, including a 
 
 and 
.
 The Ghana Police Service operates in 12 divisions: ten covering the regions of Ghana, one assigned specifically to the seaport and industrial hub of 
, and the twelfth being the Railways, Ports and Harbours Division.
 The Ghana Police Service's Marine Police Unit and Division handles issues that arise from the country's offshore 
.



The 
 and the sub-division 
 administers incarceration.
 Ghana retains and exercises the death penalty for treason, corruption, robbery, piracy, drug trafficking, rape, and homicide.
 The new sustainable development goals adopted by the United Nations call for the international community to come together to promote the rule of law; support equal access to justice for all; reduce corruption; and develop effective, accountable, and transparent institutions at all levels.
Ghana is used as a key narcotics industry transshipment point by traffickers, usually from South America as well as some from other African nations.
 In 2013, the UN chief of the Office on Drugs and Crime stated that "West Africa is completely weak in terms of border control and the big drug cartels from 
 and 
 have chosen Africa as a way to reach Europe."
 There is not a wide or popular knowledge about the narcotics industry and intercepted narcotics within Ghana, since it is an 
. The social context within which narcotic trafficking, storage, transportation, and repacking systems exist in Ghana and the state's location along the Gulf of Guinea makes Ghana an attractive country for the narcotics business.
 The 
 has impounded container ships at the Sekondi Naval Base in the 
. These ships were carrying thousands of kilograms of cocaine, with a street value running into billions of 
. However, drug seizures saw a decline in 2011.
 
 are using new methods in narcotics production and narcotics exportation, to avoid Ghanaian security agencies.
 Underdeveloped institutions, porous open borders, and the existence of established smuggling organisations contribute to Ghana's position in the narcotics industry.
 President Mills initiated ongoing efforts to reduce the role of airports in Ghana's drug trade.


 are prohibited by law in Ghana.
 According to a 2013 survey by the 
, 96% of Ghanaians believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society.
 Sometimes elderly 
 are accused of 
, particularly in rural Ghana. Issues of witchcraft mainly remain as speculations based on superstitions within families. In some parts of northern Ghana, there exist what are called 
. This is said to house a total of around 1,000 people accused of witchcraft.
 The Ghanaian government has announced that it intends to close the camps.


Ghana is divided into 16 
 regions, sub-divided into 275 districts:


Ghana is an average 
 enriched country possessing 
, 
 and 
. It is an emerging designated 
 with 
 hybridisation and an 
. It has an economic plan target known as the "Ghana Vision 2020". This plan envisions Ghana as the first African country to become a 
 between 2020 and 2029 and a 
 between 2030 and 2039.
 This excludes fellow 
 member and 
 country South Africa, which is a newly industrialised country.


Ghana's economy has ties to the 
 along with Ghana's vast gold reserves. In 2013, the 
 began circulating the renminbi throughout Ghanaian state-owned banks and to the Ghana public as 
 along with the national 
 for second national trade currency.


Between 2012 and 2013, 38% of rural dwellers were experiencing poverty whereas only 11% of urban dwellers were.
 Urban areas hold greater opportunity for employment, particularly in informal trade, while nearly all (94 percent) of rural poor households participate in the agricultural sector.


The 
 and the 
, both state-owned, are the two major electricity producers.
 The 
, built on the Volta River in 1965, along with the 
, the 
 and several other hydroelectric dams, provide 
.
 In addition, the government sought to 
.

The 
 is the 5th largest on continental Africa and 3rd largest in sub-saharan Africa with a 
 of 
 57.2 billion or 
180.4 billion in 2012 with the South Africa 
 as first.
 The 
 was the 2nd best performing 
 in sub-saharan Africa in 2013.


Ghana produces high-quality 
.
 It is the 2nd largest producer of cocoa globally.
 Ghana is classified as a middle income country.
 
 account for 50% of GDP, followed by 
 (24.1%), 
 (5%), and taxes (20.9%).
 Ghana has an increasing primary manufacturing economy and export of digital technology goods along with assembling and exporting automobiles and ships, diverse resource rich exportation of 
, agricultural products primarily cocoa, petroleum and natural gas,
 and 
 such as 
 primarily via Ghana's state digital technology corporation 
 which manufactures 
 with 
 and various 
.
 
 
 have been manufactured in Ghana since 2014.


Ghana announced plans to issue government debt by way of social and green bonds in Autumn 2021, making it the first African country to do so.
 The country, which is planning to borrow up to $5 billion in international markets this year, would use the proceeds from these sustainable bonds to refinance debt used for social and environmental projects and pay for educational or health. Only a few other nations have sold them so far, including 
 and 
. The country will use the proceeds to forge ahead with a free secondary-school initiative started in 2017 among other programs, despite having recorded its lowest economic growth rate in 37 years in 2020.


Ghana produces and exports an abundance of 
 such as 
 and 
.
 The 100%-state-owned 
 company of Ghana, 
, is the number 1 petroleum and gas filling station of Ghana, and the 100%-state-owned state oil company 
 oversees 
 and production of Ghana's entire petroleum and natural gas reserves. Ghana aims to further increase the output of oil to 2.2 million barrels (350,000 m
) per day and gas to 34,000,000 cubic metres (1.2
 cu ft) per day.


The 
, which contains up to 3 billion barrels (480,000,000 m
) of sweet crude oil, was discovered in 2007.
 Ghana is believed to have up to 5 billion barrels (790,000,000 m
) to 7 billion barrels (1.1
10
 m
) of petroleum in reserves,
 which is the fifth-largest in Africa and the 21st-to-25th-
 in the world. It also has up to 1.7
10
 cubic metres (6
 cu ft) of natural gas in reserves,
 which is the sixth-largest in Africa and the 49th-
 in the world. 
 off Ghana's eastern coast on the Gulf of Guinea is ongoing, and the amount of both crude oil and natural gas continues to increase. The government has drawn up plans to 
 Ghana's entire petroleum and natural gas reserves to increase government revenue.


As of 2019, Ghana was the 7th largest producer of gold in the world, producing ~140 
 that year.
 This record saw Ghana surpass South Africa in output for the first time, making Ghana the largest gold producer in Africa.
 In addition to gold, Ghana also exports 
, timber, 
, 
, and 
, and has numerous other not-yet-fully 
 mineral deposits.
 Ghana ranks 9th in the world in both diamond export and reserve size.
 The government has drawn up plans to 
 Ghana's mining industry to increase government revenue.


Severe shortages of electricity in 2015 & 2016 led to 
 (persistent, irregular and unpredictable electric power outages),
 increasing the interest in renewables.
 As of 2019, there is now a surplus of electricity which now presents a new set of financial challenges.


The 
 deals with corruption, economic malpractice and lack of economic transparency.
 Despite significant economic progress, obstacles do remain. Particular institutions need reform, and 
 need improvement. The overall 
 regime lacks 
. Tackling these issues will be necessary if Ghana's rapid economic growth is to be maintained.
 According to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index of 2018, out of 180 countries, Ghana was ranked 78th, with a score of 41 on a scale where a 0–9 score means highly corrupt, and a 90–100 score means very clean. This was based on perceived levels of public sector corruption.


Ghana was the first sub-Saharan African country to launch a cellular mobile network (1992). It was one of the first countries in Africa to be connected to the internet and to introduce ADSL broadband services.
 Ghana was ranked 112nd in the 
 in 2021, down from 106th in 2019.


The 
 (GSSTC) and Ghana Space Agency (GhsA) oversee the 
 and space programmes of Ghana. GSSTC and GhsA worked to have a 
 
 launched into orbit in 2015.
 Ghana's annual space exploration expenditure has been 1% of its GDP, to support research in science and technology. In 2012, Ghana was elected to chair the 
 (Comsats); Ghana has a joint effort in space exploration with the 
.


In 2011, 1,087,000 tourists visited Ghana.
 Tourist arrivals include South Americans, Asians, Europeans, and North Americans.
 The attractions and major tourist destinations include a warm, tropical climate year-round, diverse wildlife, waterfalls such as 
 and the largest waterfall in west Africa, 
, the coastal palm-lined sandy beaches, caves, mountains, rivers, and reservoirs and lakes such as 
 and the largest man-made lake in the world by surface area, 
, dozens of 
, 
, nature reserves and national parks.
 In addition to the beautiful natural reserves which serve as tourist sites, there are some castles that attract many tourists from all over the world. Some of the notable castles are 
 and the 
.
 Not only are the castles important for tourism, they also mark where blood was shed in the slave trade and preserve and promote the African heritage stolen and destroyed through the slave trade.
 As a result of this, the 
 of UNESCO named Ghana's castles and forts as World Heritage Monuments.


The 
 statistics in 2010 showed that out of the world's favourite tourist destinations, Ghana was ranked 108th out of 139 countries.
 The country had moved two places up from the 2009 rankings. In 2011, 
 magazine published that Ghana was ranked the eleventh most friendly country in the world. The assertion was based on a survey in 2010 of a cross-section of travellers. Of all the African countries that were included in the survey, Ghana ranked highest.
 Tourism is the fourth highest earner of foreign exchange for the country.
 In 2017, Ghana ranked as the 
 in the world.


A growing tourist attraction is 
. Up and down the coastline, several spots have been identified and cultivated by locals and internationals alike. Renowned surfers have made trips to the country to sample the waves. Suitable for beginners and seasoned surfers alike, there is a quality and consistency to the waves to suit all levels of skill. It is not unusual now to see surfers carrying their boards amid traditional Ghanaian 
. 
, 
, and Muuston boast some of the country's best surf in warm, tropical waters.


According to Destination Pride
–a data-driven search platform used to visualize the world's LGBTQ+ laws, rights and social sentiment–Ghana's Pride score is 22 (out of 100).


Ghana's education system is divided into three parts: basic education, secondary cycle, and tertiary education. "Basic education" lasts 11 years (ages 4‒15).
 It is divided into kindergarten (2 years), primary school (2 modules of 3 years) and junior high (3 years). Junior high school ends with the 
.
 Once certified, the pupil can proceed to the secondary cycle.
 Hence, the pupil has the choice between general education (offered by the senior high school) and vocational education (offered by the technical senior high school or the technical and vocational institutes). Senior high school lasts three years and leads to the 
, which is a prerequisite for enrollment in a university bachelor's degree programme.
 Polytechnics are open to vocational students.


A bachelor's degree usually requires four years of study. It can be followed by a one- or two-year master's degree programme, which can be followed by a PhD programme of at least three years.
 A polytechnic programme lasts two or three years.
 Ghana possesses numerous colleges of education.
 Some of the notable universities, the 
, 
, and 
, to mention a few.
 

With over 95% of its children in school, Ghana currently has one of the highest school enrollment rates in all of Africa.
 The female and male ages 15–24 years literacy rate in Ghana was 81% in 2010, with males at 82%,
 and females at 80%.
 Ghana's education system annually attracts many 
 particularly in the university sector.


Ghana has a 
 6-year primary school education system beginning at age six.
 The government largely funds basic education comprising public primary schools and public junior high schools. Senior high schools were subsidised by the government until September 2017/2018 academic year that senior high education became free.
 At the higher education level, the government funds more than 80% of resources provided to public universities, polytechnics and teacher training colleges. As part of the Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education, Fcube, the government supplies all basic education schools with all their textbooks and other educational supplies, like exercise books. Senior high schools are also provided with all their textbook requirements by the government. Private schools acquire their educational material from private suppliers.


As of 2019, Ghana has a population of 30,083,000.
 Around 29% of the population is under the age of 15, while persons aged 15–64 make up 57.8 percent of the population.
 The 2010 census reported that the largest ethnic groups are the Akan (47.3%), the Mole-Dagbani (16.6%), the Ewe (13.9%), the Ga-Dangme (7.4%), the Gurma (5.7%) and the Guan (3.7%).
 
The median age of Ghanaian citizens is 30 years old and the average household size is 3.6 persons.


With 
 of 
 who possess 
, there is a small population of Chinese, Malaysian, Indian, Middle Eastern and European nationals. In 2010, the 
 reported many 
 and 
: 14.6% (or 3.1 million) of Ghana's 2010 population (predominantly Nigerians, Burkinabe citizens, Togolese citizens, and Malian citizens). In 1969, under the "Ghana Aliens Compliance Order" enacted by the Prime Minister Kofi Abrefa Busia;
 The 
 deported over 3,000,000 aliens and illegal immigrants in three months as they made up 20% of the population at the time.
In 2013, there was a mass deportation of illegal miners, more than 4,000 of them Chinese nationals.
English is the 
 of Ghana.
 Additionally, there are eleven languages that have the status of government-sponsored languages:

Of these, Asante Twi is the most widely spoken.


Because Ghana is surrounded by 
, French is widely taught in schools and used for commercial and international economic exchanges. Since 2006, Ghana has been an associate member of the 
,
 the global organisation that unites French-speaking countries (84 nations on six continents). In 2005, more than 350,000 Ghanaian children studied French in schools. Since then, its status has been progressively updated to a mandatory language in every junior high school,
 and it is in the process of becoming an official language.


, also known as Kru English (or in Akan, 
), is a variety of 
 spoken mainly in Accra and in the southern towns.
 It can be divided into two varieties, referred to as "uneducated" or "non-institutionalized" pidgin and "educated" or "institutionalized" pidgin, the former associated with uneducated or illiterate people and the latter acquired and used in institutions such as universities.


In 2010, the population was 72.2% Christian (24.3% 
, 18.4% 
, 13.1% 
 and 11.4% other). Approximately 18.6% of the population of Ghana are Muslim,
 (51% 
, 16% 
, and 8% 
).
 Hinduism in Ghana was popularized by Swami Ghana Nanda ji, who opened several temples in the nation.
 The temple of Lord Shiva in Accra is one of the largest where there are celebrations to Ganesh Chaturthi, Rath Yatra, and other Hindu observations.
 The 
 religious community, established in Ghana in 1951, today includes more than 100 communities and over 50 local Bahá’í administrative councils, called Local Spiritual Assemblies.


Ghana has a 
 system strictly designated for 
, 
 (NHIS).
 Health care is variable throughout Ghana and in 2012, over 12 million Ghanaian nationals were covered by the NHIS.
 Urban centres are well served and contain most of the hospitals, clinics, and pharmacies. There are over 200 hospitals, and Ghana is a destination for 
.
 In 2010, there were 0.1 physicians per 1,000 people and as of 2011
, 0.9 hospital beds per 1,000 people.
 5.2% of Ghana's GDP was spent on health in 2010.
 In 2020, the WHO announced Ghana became the second country in the WHO African Region to attain regulatory system "maturity level 3", the second-highest in the four-tiered WHO classification of 
.


Life expectancy at birth in 2020 was 71 for a female and 65 for a male.
 In 2013, 
 was to 39 per 1,000 live births.
 Sources vary on life expectancy at birth; the 
 (WHO) estimated 62 years for men and 64 years for women born in 2016.
 The fertility rate declined from 3.99 (2000) to 3.28 (2010) with 2.78 in urban region and 3.94 in rural region.
 The United Nations reports a fertility decline from 6.95 (1970) to 4.82 (2000) to 3.93 live births per woman in 2017.


As of 2012
, the 
 prevalence was estimated at 1.40% among adults aged 15–49.


 includes an assortment of soups and stews with varied seafoods; most Ghanaian soups are prepared with vegetables, meat, poultry or fish.
 Fish is important in the diet with tilapia, roasted and fried 
, smoked fish and crayfish, all being common components of Ghanaian dishes.
 
 (akple) is a common starchy food made from ground corn (maize),
 and cornmeal based staples kɔmi (
) and banku (akple) are usually accompanied by some form of fried fish (chinam) or grilled tilapia and a very spicy condiment made from raw red and green chillies, onions and tomatoes (pepper sauce).
 Banku and tilapia is a combo served in most restaurants.
 
 is the most common exported Ghanaian dish and is a delicacy across the 
.
 Rice is an established staple meal across the country, with various rice based dishes serving as breakfast, lunch and dinner, the main variants are waakye, plain rice and stew (eight kontomire or tomato gravy), fried rice and 
.


 is literature produced by authors from Ghana or in the 
. The tradition of literature starts with a long oral tradition, was influence heavily by western literature during colonial rule, and became prominent with a post-colonial nationalist tradition in the mid 20th century.
 The current literary community continues with a diverse network of voices both within and outside the country today, including film, theatre, and modern digital formats such as blogging.


The most prominent authors are novelists 
, 
 and 
, who gained international acclaim with the books 
 (1911), 
 (1968) and 
 (2009), respectively.
 In addition to novels, other literature arts such as theatre and poetry have also had a very good development and support at the national level with prominent playwrights and poets 
 and 
.
 


During the 13th century, Ghanaians developed their unique art of 
 printing. Hand-printed and hand-embroidered adinkra clothes were made and used exclusively by royalty for devotional ceremonies. Each of the motifs that make up the 
 of adinkra symbolism has a name and meaning derived from a proverb, a historical event, human attitude, 
, 
, or shapes of inanimate and man-made objects. The meanings of the motifs may be categorised into aesthetics, ethics, human relations, and concepts.
 The Adinkra symbols have a decorative function as tattoos but also represent objects that encapsulate evocative messages that convey traditional wisdom, aspects of life, or the environment. There are many symbols with distinct meanings, often linked with proverbs. In the words of 
, they were one of the means in a pre-literate society for "supporting the transmission of a complex and nuanced body of practice and belief".
Along with the 
 Ghanaians use many cloth fabrics for their traditional attire.
 The different ethnic groups have their own individual cloth. The most well known is the 
.
 Kente is a very important national costume and clothing, and these clothes are used to make traditional and modern Kente attire.
 Different symbols and different colours mean different things.
 
 is the most famous of all the Ghanaian clothes.
 Kente is a ceremonial cloth hand-woven on a horizontal 
 and strips measuring about 4 inches wide are sewn together into larger pieces of cloths.
 Cloths come in various colours, sizes and designs and are worn during very important social and religious occasions.
 In a cultural context, kente is more important than just a cloth as it is a visual representation of history and also a form of written language through weaving.
 The term kente has its roots in the Akan word 
 which means a basket and the first kente weavers used raffia fibres to weave cloths that looked like kenten (a basket); and thus were referred to as 
; meaning basket cloth.
 The original Akan name of the cloth was 
 or 
, meaning "a cloth hand-woven on a loom"; however, "kente" is the most frequently used term today.
Kente is also woven by the Ewe people (Ewe Kente) in the Volta Region. The main weaving centers are Agortime area and Agbozume. Agbozume has a vibrant kente market attracting patrons from all over west Africa and the diaspora.


Contemporary Ghanaian fashion includes traditional and modern styles and fabrics and has made its way into the African and global fashion scene. The cloth known as 
 was created out of Dutch wax textiles. It is believed that in the late 19th century, Dutch ships on their way to Asia stocked with machine-made textiles that mimicked Indonesian 
 stopped at many West African ports on the way. The fabrics did not do well in Asia. However, in West Africa—mainly Ghana where there was an already established market for cloths and textiles—the client base grew and it was changed to include local and traditional designs, colours and patterns to cater to the taste of the new consumers.
 Today outside of Africa it is called "Ankara," and it has a client base well beyond Ghana and Africa as a whole. It is popular among Caribbean peoples and African Americans; celebrities such as 
 and her sister 
 have been seen wearing African print attire.
 Many designers from countries in North America and Europe are now using African prints, and they have gained a global interest.
 British luxury fashion house 
 created a collection around Ghanaian styles.
 American musician 
 has repeatedly incorporated African prints into her clothing line and can often be seen wearing it.
 Internationally acclaimed Ghanaian-British designer 
 introduced African print suits in his 2012 collection.


The 
 is diverse and varies between different ethnic groups and regions. Ghanaian music incorporates several distinct types of musical instruments such as the talking drum ensembles, 
, 
 fiddle and koloko lute, court music, including the Akan 
, the Akan atumpan, the Ga kpanlogo styles, and log 
 used in asonko music.
 The most well-known genres to have come from Ghana are African jazz, which was created by 
,
 and its earliest form of secular music, called 
.
 Highlife originated in the late 19th century and early 20th century and spread throughout West Africa.
 

In the 1990s, a new genre of music was created by the youth incorporating the influences of highlife, Afro-reggae, 
 and 
.
 This hybrid was called 
.
 Ghanaian artists such as "Afro Roots" singer, activist and songwriter 
, R&B and soul singer 
 and 
 have had international success.
 In 2015, Rocky Dawuni became the first Ghanaian musician to be nominated for a Grammy award in the 
 category for his sixth studio album, titled 


Ghanaian dance is as diverse as its music, and there are traditional dances and different dances for different occasions.
 The most known dances are those for celebrations. These dances include the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and 
.
 The Nana Otafrija Pallbearing Services, also known as the 
, come from the coastal town of 
. The group was featured in a BBC feature story in 2017, and footage from the story became part of an Internet meme in the wake of the 
.


Ghana has a budding and thriving film industry. 
 dates as far back as 1948 when the Gold Coast Film Unit was set up in the Information Services Department.
 Some internationally recognised films have come from Ghana. In 1970, 
 was one of the first Ghanaian films to receive international acknowledgement and received great reviews from 
.
 It was followed by the 1973 Ghanaian and Italian production 
 also known as "
" featuring Bahamian American actor 
.
 1983's 
, a Ghanaian and German production directed by King Ampaw, was written about by famous American film critic 
.
 In 1987, 
, another Ghanaian and German production directed by 
, received international acclamation and in 1988, 
 won more than 12 film awards.

In recent times, there have been collaborations between Ghanaian and Nigerian crew and cast and a number of productions turned out. Many Ghanaian films are co-produced with 
, the Nigerian film industry, and some are distributed by Nigerian marketers. Also, Nigerian filmmakers often feature Ghanaian actors and actresses in their movies, and Ghanaian filmmakers feature Nigerian actors and actresses in theirs. 
, 
, 
 and 
, all popular Ghanaian actresses, and 
 and 
 are popular Ghanaian actors, have starred in many Nigerian movies. As a result of these collaborations, Western viewers often confuse Ghanaian movies with Nollywood and count their sales as one; however, they are two independent industries that sometimes share 
. In 2009, UNESCO described Nollywood as the second-biggest film industry in the world after 
.
 Though The film industry had a downtrend for almost a decade mainly because of low input in production this scenario has drastically changed. New and emerging young film makers are adding spice to the already rich Ghana movie scene. Bliz Bazawule,
 Peter Sedufia,
 Joseph Clef
 and many others have shown the world the new age of filming in Ghana.

The 
 are amongst the most free in Africa. Chapter 12 of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana guarantees 
 and independence of the media, while Chapter 2 prohibits censorship.
 Post-independence, the government and media often had a tense relationship, with private outlets closed during the military governments and strict media laws that prevented criticism of government.
 Press freedoms were restored in 1992, and after the election in 2000 of Kufuor, the tensions between the private media and government decreased. Kufuor supported press freedom and repealed a 
 law, but maintained that the media had to act responsibly.
 The Ghanaian media have been described as "one of the most unfettered" in Africa, operating with little restriction. The private press often carries criticism of government policy.


 is the top spectator sport in Ghana, and the 
 is known as the Black Stars, with the 
 known as the Black Satellites.
 Ghana has won the 
 four times, the 
 once, and has participated in three consecutive 
 in 2006, 2010, and 2014.
 In the 
, Ghana became the third African country to reach the quarter-final stage after Cameroon in 1990 and Senegal in 2002.
 Ghana is the first and only country on the Africa continent to be crowned FIFA U-20 World Cup Champions,
 and two-time runners up in 
 and 
. The Ghana national U-17 football team known as the Black Starlets are two-time 
 champions in 
 and 
, two-time runners up in 
 and 
.


Ghanaian 
 
 and 
 are the 5th and 9th best football teams on the Africa continent and have won a total of five Africa continental association football and 
 trophies; Asante Kotoko SC has been crowned two-time 
 winners in 
, 
 and five-time CAF Champions League runners up. Accra Hearts of Oak SC has been crowned 
 winner and two-time CAF Champions League runners up, 2001 
 champions and 
 champions.
 The 
 crowned Asante Kotoko SC as the 
.
 There are several club football teams that play in the 
 and 
, both administered by the 
.


Ghana competed in the Winter Olympics in 2010 for the first time. Ghana qualified for the 2010 Winter Olympics, scoring 137.5 
 points, within the qualifying range of 120–140 points.
 Skier 
 became the first Ghanaian to take part in the Winter Olympics, taking part in the 
.
 Ghana finished 47th out of 102 participating nations, of whom 54 finished in the 
.
 Ghana's last medal at the 
 dates back to 1992.
 Ghanaian athletes have won a total of four medals in thirteen appearances at the Summer Olympics, three in boxing, and a bronze medal in association football, and thus became the first country on the Africa continent to win a medal at association football.


Ghana competes in the 
, sending athletes in every edition since 
 (except for the 
). Ghana has won 57 medals at the Commonwealth Games, including 15 gold, with all but one of their medals coming in athletics and boxing. The country has also produced a number of world class boxers, including 
 a three-time world champion and considered as Africa's greatest boxer,
 
 also a three-time world champion,
 
,
 and 
.



Ghana's women's football team won a bronze at the 
 2016 edition in Yaoundé, Cameroon. The team beat South Africa 1–0.
 Ghana featured a men's national team in 
 that competed at the 
.
 Ghana is to host the 
 in Accra.
There are two types of Ghanaian traditional construction: the series of adjacent buildings in an enclosure around a common, and the traditional round huts with grass roof.
 The round huts with grass roof architecture are situated in the northern regions, while the series of adjacent buildings are in the southern regions. Ghanaian 
 and 
 buildings are predominant in the southern regions, while heritage sites are most evident in the more than thirty forts and castles in the country, such as 
 and 
. Ghana has museums that are situated inside castles, and two are situated inside a fort.
 The 
 and the 
 organise temporary exhibitions.


Ghana has museums that show an in-depth look at specific regions. There are a number of museums that provide insight into the traditions and history of the geographical areas.
 The 
 Museum and St. Georges Castle (
) Museum offer guided tours. The 
 provides its visitors with a look into the domain of Ghanaian scientific development, through exhibits of objects of scientific and technological interest.


The 
 depicts two animals: the 
 and the lion; a ceremonial sword; a heraldic castle on a heraldic sea; a 
 and a mine shaft representing the industrial mineral wealth of Ghana; and a five-pointed black star rimmed with gold, representing the mineral gold wealth of Ghana and the lodestar of the Ghanaian people.
 It also has the legend 
.



The 
 consists of three horizontal bands (strips) of red (top), gold (middle) and green (bottom); the three bands are the same height and width; the middle band bears a five-pointed black 
 in the centre of the gold band, the colour red band stands for the blood spilled to achieve the nation's independence: gold stands for Ghana's industrial mineral wealth, and the colour green symbolises the rich tropical rainforests and natural resources of Ghana.
279 Felix Kuadugah- contributor- Ewe migration








 (historically spelled 
 or 
, usually spelled 
 in 
)
 is a city in the 
, and is among the 
 
 in Ghana. Kumasi is located in a 
 region near 
, and is the commercial, industrial, and cultural capital of the historical 
. Kumasi is approximately 500 kilometres (300 mi) north of 
 and 200 kilometres (100 mi) north of the 
. Kumasi is alternatively known as "The Garden City"
 because of its many species of flowers and plants in the past. It is also called Oseikrom (
's the first town).

Kumasi is the second-largest city in Ghana, after the capital, 
.
 The Central Business District of Kumasi includes areas such as 
, 
, Asawasi, Pampaso and 
 (popularly called Roman Hill), with a concentration of banks, department stalls, and hotels. Economic activities in Kumasi include financial and commercial sectors, pottery, clothing and textiles. There is a significant timber processing community in Kumasi serving the domestic market. Bantama High Street and Prempeh II Street in Bantama and Adum, respectively, are the business and entertainment hubs in Kumasi.

There is evidence that the area around Kumasi has been kept cleared since the 
 age and that the first human settlement was at 
.


The name Kumasi derives from the 
 language, meaning 'under the Kum tree'. The word "ase" or "asi" means 'under', 'down' or 'below', and is used in many place names in 
, such as 
, 
, and 
.

Around the end of the 17th century, the Ashanti Kingdom's chief fetish Priest, 
 planted three 
 trees at different places: one at Kwaaman, ruled by the Nananom Ayokofuo; a second one at Apemso-Bankofo, ruled by Nananom Aduanafuo; and a third at a village near Fomena and Amoafo called Oboani, which was ruled by Nananom Ɛkoɔnafuo. Komfuo wanted to see which of these would become a great city for the kingdom, as he was directed by the oracles. The 
 tree at Kwaaman flourished so vigorously that the King and his people often sat underneath, and so Kwaaman became Kum-ase, meaning 'under 
.

The tree at Oboani was, however, very tiny and for no apparent reason was relatively short. According to oral tradition, this small tree produced other trees which were all small in size. The name of the village was changed to Kuma, meaning 'small 
.

The 
 tree at Apemso-Bankofo did not grow at all. After a few weeks the leaves rotted and the tree fell down; so it was said that the village's 
 tree was dead, and the village became Kum-awu, later Kumawu.


The city rose to prominence in 1695 when it became capital of the 
 due to the activities of its ruler 
.
 The ruler of Kumasi, known as the 
, also served as ruler of the empire. With their 
 over 
 the Ashanti empire became the primary state among the 
.
 Parts of the city, including the then royal residence, were burnt by the 
 in the 
 of 1874.


Lady Mary Alice Hodgson, the first English lady to visit Ashanti, wrote "The Siege of Kumasi", an account of the siege of the fort by the 
 of Ashanti and of the subsequent march to the coast.
 (She was the daughter of Hon. W. A. G. Young, C.M.G., former governor of the 
, and the wife of Sir 
, K.C.M.G., the governor of the Gold Coast in 1900.
)

In 1926, following the return of the Ashanti King 
 after a 30-year exile, Kumasi was restored as the ceremonial control over the Ashanti sub-states .The full role of king was restored by the colonial administration in 1935. The city holds an important place in the history of the Ashanti people, as legend claims that it was here Okomfo Anokye received the 
.

The city features a 
, with relatively constant temperatures throughout the course of the year. Kumasi averages around 1400 mm (55") of rain per year.

The city almost features two rainy seasons: a longer season from March through July and a shorter rainy season from September to November.

The months of February through to November is one long 
, with a relative lull in precipitation in August. Similar to the rest of West Africa, Kumasi experiences the 
 during the "low sun" months. Lasting from December to February, the harmattan is the primary source of the city's 
.

Like other parts of Ghana, Kumasi has a 
 (
 
), with a wet season and a dry season and the temperature being hot year-round. The average annual high temperature is 30.7 °C (87.3 °F), while the average annual low temperature is 21.5 °C (70.7 °F). The hottest time of year is from February to May, around the time the wet season starts. February has the highest average high at 33.5 °C (92.3 °F). April has the highest average low at 22.4 °C (72.3 °F). August has the lowest average high at 27.7 °C (81.9 °F). January has the lowest average low at 20.4 °C (68.7 °F).

Kumasi receives 1,402.4 millimetres (55.21 in) of rain over 128 precipitation days, with a distinct wet and dry season like the rest of Ghana. The dry season is short, lasting from November to February. June, the wettest month, receives 214.3 millimetres (8.44 in) of rainfall over 17 precipitation days on average. Kumasi receives 1951.8 hours of sunshine annually on average, with the sunshine being distributed fairly evenly across the year, with a noticeable dip from June to October. March receives the most sunshine, while August receives the least.

Features of the city include Fort Kumasi (built by in 1896 to replace an Asante fort and now a museum) and the Kumasi Hat Museum.
Royal Asante attractions include the Kumasi National Cultural Centre (including the 
 Jubilee Museum with Asante 
 with a reproduction of the golden stool), the 
 
, the 
's Palace (built in 1972), and the Manhyia Palace, dating from 1925, now a museum.

Among the 
, which are predominantly 
 churches and temples, are: 
, 
, 
,  (
), 
 
 (
), 
 (which was the first Pentecostal church in Ghana) 
 (
), 
, 
, 
, and 
 
 (
).
 There are also 
 mosques which include: Kumasi Central mosque, Ahmadiyya mosque, Alhaj mosque, Kaase-Nhyiaeso mosque and Rahman mosque.

The main occupations in Kumasi are professional such as 
 and manufacturing.

Kumasi has 50% of the 
 of 
, and the Kaasi 
 plays an important role in the local industry. The 
 is based in Kumasi.

 are prevalent in Kumasi and throughout the Ashanti region. 
 technology is a major energy source and contributor of 
 in region.

Much of the shopping and trading activity in the city takes place at Kumasi's 
 streets, in and around 
 and Adum. These two areas – Kejetia and Adum – have a common boundary. There is also heavy economic activities at Bantama and Asafo. Asafo in particular is the printing hub of Kumasi. Most of the printing done in Kumasi and Ashanti Region as a whole is done at Asafo. Kumasi's 
 (a sub-town in Kumasi) is also well noted for its wood carvings and arts.

There are both government-assisted primary schools in Kumasi and also private primary schools in Kumasi which educate boys and girls between the ages from 6 to 15.

There are elite all-boys and all-girls senior high schools such as 
, 
, 
 and 
 in Kumasi. There are also many elite mixed senior high schools such as 
 and 
, and a host of other public secondary schools, as well as their private counterparts in the city.

The 
, Kumasi (formerly the Kumasi College of Technology) is the biggest university in the Ashanti Region and the first biggest in Ghana followed by the 
. Former 
, 
 attended this institution.
A number of other public and private universities and tertiary institutions have since been founded in Kumasi, some of which are listed below.

formerly the University of Education, Winneba (Kumasi Campus)]]
Tanoso

Kumasi is served by the 
. As of May 2020 two airlines offered regularly scheduled flights to 
. Airlines servicing the airport included 
 and 
. In 2013, the Government of Ghana approved expansion plans to the Kumasi Airport to service international flights into the region. The renovation project will span three development stages, with all work expected to be completed by October 2022.


There is public transportation from Kumasi to major cities such as 
; 
, 
 ; 
, 
; 
; 
; 
; 
; 
; 
; 
, 
;
Public transport in the city is provided by 
, a mix of privately owned mini-buses known as 
, 
 and buses. Tro-tros are usually converted mini-buses that run regular, well-known routes. Some taxis also run regular routes, which cost more but provide for a more comfortable ride.

In 2002, the city introduced the 
, a rapid transit system for public road transport in Kumasi (
).
 This was to reduce congestion on roads and to make a larger and more organised bus routine system in the city.


In 2017, 
 introduced services in Kumasi, a year after a successful introduction in Accra.

Kumasi is served by the railway lines to 
 and Accra. The train service has been suspended for several years because of damaged track, bridges and locomotives. Currently, no trains run to and from Kumasi due to the collapse of the railway corporation. A $6 billion project to upgrade the railways was due to get underway in 2011.


As of 2011
, construction of the 
, about 25 kilometres (16 mi) away, has come to a halt.


The local 
 team, the 
 has won several national and continental trophies and awards, and serves as a rival to the Accra-based 
. Their 
, also known as 
, was built in 1959, renovated in 1978, and again in 2007 with a seating capacity of 40,000.
 It is also the home of 
, a premier division side.

There is the Royal Golf Club which has the 
 as president. Former 
 and 
 footballer 
 and professional wrestler 
 was born in Kumasi, by the real name Kofi Sarkodie-Mensah.

Kumasi has the 
 to support medical training at the university, the 
, several other 
, public clinics and hospitals. Recommended private medical facilities include Kumasi Rabito Clinic located at Ahondwo-Daban Kumasi behind the Unity Oil Filling Station.There is also the 
 hospital that serves people in the university and surrounding communities.

Kumasi has four recreational parks which are opened to the public. The list of recreational parks are 
 which is located some few meters away from 
, 
, 
 located on the same premises as the 
, and finally the 
 which was commissioned in 2015.

Kumasi is 
 with:

The 
 is the northeasternmost part of the tropical 
 from 
 in 
, north and west to 
 in 
.
 The intersection of the 
 and 
 (zero degrees 
 and 
) is in the gulf.


Among the many rivers that drain into the Gulf of Guinea are the 
 and the 
. The coastline on the gulf includes the 
 and the 
.

The origin of the name Guinea is thought to be an area in the region, although the specifics are disputed. Bovill (1995) gives a thorough description:


The name 
 is usually said to have been a corrupt form of the name 
, picked up by the Portuguese in the 
. The present writer finds this unacceptable. The name Guinea has been in use both in the Maghrib and in Europe long before Prince Henry's time. For example, on a map dated about 1320 by the Genoese cartographer Giovanni di Carignano, who got his information about Africa from a fellow-countryman in 
 [ancient trading city in North Africa], we find Gunuia, and in the Catalan atlas of 1375 as Ginyia. A passage in Leo [Africanus] (vol. III, 822) points to Guinea having been a corrupt form of 
 [2,000-year-old city in central Mali on Niger river], less famous than Ghana but nevertheless for many centuries famed in the Maghrib as a great market and a seat of learning. The relevant passage reads: "The Kingdom of Ghinea . . . called by the merchants of our nation Gheneoa, by the natural inhabitants thereof Genni and by the Portugals and other people of Europe Ghinea." But it seems more probable that Guinea derives from
, the Berber for Negro. Marrakech [city in southeastern Morocco] has a gate, built in the twelfth century, called the Bab Aguinaou, the Gate of the Negro (Delafosse, Haut-Sénégal-Niger, II, 277-278). The modern application of the name Guinea to the coast dates only from 1481. In that year the Portuguese built a fort, 
 (modern day 
), on the 
, and their king, John II, was permitted by the Pope [Sixtus II or Innocent VIII] to style himself Lord of Guinea, a title that survived until the recent extinction of the monarchy.
The name "
" was also applied to south coast of 
, north of the Gulf of Guinea, which became known as "Upper Guinea", and the west coast of 
, to the east, which became known as "Lower Guinea".
 The name "Guinea" is still attached to the names of three countries in Africa: 
, 
, and 
, as well as 
 in 
.

The main river shedding its waters in the gulf is the 
.

Different definitions of the geographic limits of the Gulf of Guinea are given; the 
 defines the southwest extent of the Gulf of Guinea as "B line from Cap Lopez (
), in Gabon, northwestward to 
 (
); and thence a line from Ihléu Gago Coutinho northwestward to Cape Palmas (
), in Liberia.


Old French map of the Gulf of Guinea

Different limits of the Gulf of Guinea

 of the Gulf of Guinea showing borders of states on its shores

The Gulf of Guinea contains a number of islands, the largest of which are in a southwest-northeast chain, forming part of the 
 of volcanoes.

, also known as Pagalu or Pigalu, is an island that is part of 
.

 is an island off the west coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea that is part of the 
 of 
.

 is an 
 off the 
 region of Cameroon in the Gulf of Guinea under the sovereignty of Equatorial Guinea.

 is an island belonging to Equatorial Guinea.

 and 
 are two small islands belonging to Equatorial Guinea.

 (officially the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe) is a Portuguese-speaking 
 in the Gulf of Guinea that became independent from 
 in 1975. It is located off the western equatorial coast of Africa and consists of two islands, 
 and 
. They are located about 140 kilometres (87 mi) apart and about 250 and 225 kilometres (155 and 140 mi), respectively, off the northwestern coast of 
. Both islands are part of an 
 
 
. São Tomé, the sizeable southern island, is situated just north of the 
.


Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea consists of 18 sovereign states.
 Multiple institutional mandates address maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea: The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS).
 Additionally, maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is also addressed by the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC).
 Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea is characterised not only by piracy but by a myriad of maritime crimes despite piracy often dominating the conversation on maritime security. According to the ‘Priority Paper for the Danish Efforts to Combat Piracy and Other Types of Maritime Crime 2019-2022’ piracy and maritime crime are defined as follows:
 can be defined as any illegal act of violence, detention or depredation committed for private ends at high seas against another ship or aircraft.
 Maritime crime may include armed robbery at sea, trafficking of humans or smuggling of illicit goods, drugs and weapons, 
, fuel theft and more.
The other notable crimes in the Gulf of Guinea are illegal fishing, kidnap for ransom, drug trafficking and oil-bunkering.
 Illegal oil-bunkering consists of the attacking of vessels transporting oil and transferring the oil to the thieves’ own vessel.
 After which the oil is sold in local and international markets.

Kidnapping for ransom is one of the most prevalent maritime crimes in the region. Between 2018 and 2019, the number of crew members that were kidnapped in the Gulf of Guinea increased by 50%, leading the region to account for 90% of global kidnappings at sea.




The 
 (
: 
), today commonly called the 
, was an 
 state that lasted between 1701 to 1901, in what is now modern-day 
.
 It expanded from the 
 to include most of Ghana as well as parts of 
 and 
.
 Due to the empire's 
, 
, architecture, 
 and 
, the Ashanti Empire has been extensively studied and has more historic records written by European, primarily British, authors than any other indigenous culture of 
.


Starting in the late 17th century, the Ashanti king 
 (
 – 1717) and his adviser 
 established the Ashanti Kingdom, with the 
 as a sole unifying symbol.
 Osei Tutu oversaw a massive Ashanti territorial expansion, building up the army by introducing new organisation and turning a disciplined royal and paramilitary army into an effective fighting machine.
 In 1701, the Ashanti army conquered 
, giving the Ashanti access to the 
 and the 
 coastal trade with Europeans, notably the 
.
 The economy of the Ashanti Empire was mainly based on the trade of gold and agricultural exports 
 as well as 
, 
 work and trade with markets further 
.
 

The army served as the effective tool to procure captives.
 The Ashanti Empire fought several wars with neighboring kingdoms and lesser organized groups such as the 
. The Ashanti defeated the 
's invasions in the first two of the four 
, killing British army general 
 and keeping his skull as a gold-rimmed drinking cup in 1824. British forces later burnt and sacked the Ashanti capital of 
, however, and after the final Ashanti defeat at the fifth Anglo-Ashanti War, the Ashanti empire became part of the Gold Coast colony on 1 January 1902. Today, the Ashanti Kingdom survives as a constitutionally protected, sub-national 
 in union with the Republic of Ghana. The current king of the Ashanti Kingdom is 
. The Ashanti Kingdom is the home to 
, Ghana's only natural lake. The state's current economic revenue is derived mainly from trading in 
, 
, 
 and 
.


The name 
 means "because of war". The word derives from the 
 words 
 meaning "war" and 
 meaning "because of". This name comes from the Asante's origin as a kingdom created to fight the 
 kingdom.


The variant name "Ashanti" comes from British reports transcribing "Asante" as the British heard it pronounced, 
. The hyphenation was subsequently dropped and the name 
 remained, with various spellings including 
 common into the early 20th century.

Between the 10th and 12th centuries AD, the ethnic 
 migrated into the forest belt of Southern Ghana and established several Akan states: 

Before the Ashanti Kingdom had contact with Europeans, it had a flourishing trade with other African states due to the Ashanti 
 wealth. Trade with European states began after contact with the 
 in the 15th century AD.
 When the 
 in the 
 started to play out, the Ashanti Kingdom rose to prominence as the major player in the gold trade.
 At the height of the Ashanti Kingdom, the Ashanti people became wealthy through the trading of gold mined from their territory.


Ashanti political organization was originally centred on 
 headed by a 
 or O
.
 One particular clan, the 
, settled in the Ashanti's sub-tropical forest region, establishing a centre at 
.
 The Ashanti became tributaries of another Akan state, 
 but in the mid-17th century the Oyoko under Chief Oti Akenten started consolidating the Ashanti clans into a loose 
 against the Denkyira.



The introduction of the 
 (
) was a means of centralization under Osei Tutu. According to legend, a meeting of all the clan heads of each of the Ashanti settlements was called just prior to declaring independence from Denkyira. Those included members from Nsuta, Mampong, Dwaben, Bekwai and Kokofu.
 In this meeting the Golden Stool was commanded down from the heavens by Okomfo Anokye, chief-priest or sage advisor to 
 Osei Tutu I and floated down from the heavens into the lap of Osei Tutu I. Okomfo 
 declared the stool to be symbolic of the new Ashanti Union (
), and allegiance was sworn to the stool and to Osei Tutu as the 
. The newly declared Ashanti union subsequently waged war against and defeated Denkyira.
 The stool remains sacred to the Ashanti as it is believed to contain the 
 — spirit or soul of the Ashanti people.
In the 1670s the head of the 
 clan, 
, began another rapid consolidation of 
 via diplomacy and warfare.
 King Osei Kofu Tutu I and his chief advisor, Okomfo Kwame Frimpong 
 led a coalition of influential Ashanti city-states against their mutual oppressor, the 
 who held the Ashanti Kingdom in its thrall. The Ashanti Kingdom utterly defeated them at the 
, proclaiming its independence in 1701. Subsequently, through hard line force of arms and savoir-faire diplomacy, the duo induced the leaders of the other Ashanti city-states to declare allegiance and adherence to Kumasi, the Ashanti capital. From the beginning, King Osei Tutu and priest 
 followed an expansionist and an imperialistic provincial foreign policy. According to folklore, Okomfo Anokye is believed to have visited 
.


Realizing the strengths of a loose confederation of Akan states, Osei Tutu strengthened centralization of the surrounding Akan groups and expanded the powers of the judiciary system within the centralized government. This loose confederation of small city-states grew into a kingdom and eventually an empire looking to expand its borders. Newly conquered areas had the option of joining the empire or becoming tributary states.
 
, Osei Tutu's successor, extended the borders, embracing much of Ghana's territory.


European contact with the Ashanti on the 
 coast region of Africa began in the 15th century. This led to trade in 
, 
, 
, and other goods with the 
.
 On May 15, 1817, the Englishman 
 entered Kumasi. He remained there for several months, was impressed, and on his return to England wrote a book, 
.
  His praise of the kingdom was disbelieved as it contradicted prevailing prejudices. 
, the first British consul in Kumasi, arrived on March 23, 1820. Both Bowdich and Dupuis secured a treaty with the Asantehene. But, the governor, Hope Smith, did not meet Ashanti expectations.


From 1824 till 1899 there were five 
 between the Ashanti Empire and Great Britain and its allies. The British lost or negotiated truces in several of these wars, with the final war resulting in British burning of 
 and official occupation of the Ashanti Empire in 1900. The wars were mainly due to Ashanti attempts to establish a stronghold over the coastal areas of present-day Ghana. Coastal peoples such as the 
 and the 
 came to rely on British protection against Ashanti incursions.

In December 1895, the British left 
 with an expeditionary force to start what is known as the Third Anglo-Ashanti War, see below. The Asantehene directed the Ashanti to not resist the British advance, as he feared reprisals from Britain if the expedition turned violent. Shortly thereafter, Governor 
 arrived in Kumasi as well.


Britain 
 the territories of the Ashanti and the Fanti and constituted the 
 on 26 September 1901.
 Asantehene Agyeman Prempeh was deposed and arrested, and he and other Ashanti leaders were sent into exile in the 
. The Asante Union was dissolved
. A 
 was permanently placed in the city of Kumasi, and soon after a British fort was built there
.

As a final measure of resistance, the remaining Asante court not exiled to the Seychelles mounted an offensive against the British Residents at the Kumasi Fort. The resistance was led by Asante queen 
, Queen-Mother of Ejisu. From March 28 to late September 1900, the Asante and British were engaged in what would become known as the 
. In the end, the British were victorious; they exiled Asantewaa and other Asante leaders to the Seychelles to join Asante King Prempeh I.

In January 1902, Britain finally designated the Ashanti Kingdom as a 
. the Ashanti Kingdom was restored to self-rule on 31 January 1935. Asante King Prempeh II was restored in 1957, and the Ashanti Kingdom entered a 
 with Ghana on independence from the United Kingdom.




The Ashanti state was a centralized state made up of a hierarchy of heads starting from the "
 Panyin" who was head of a family or lineage. The family was the basic political unit in the empire. The family or lineage followed the village organization which was headed by the 
. All villages were then grouped together to form divisions headed by a divisional head called 
. The various divisions were politically grouped to form a state which was headed by an 
 or 
. Finally, all Ashanti states formed the Ashanti Empire with the Asantehene as their king.


The Ashanti government was built upon a sophisticated 
 in Kumasi, with separate 
 to handle the state's affairs.
 Of particular note was Ashanti's Foreign Office based in Kumasi; despite its small size, it allowed the state to pursue complex negotiations with foreign powers. The Office was divided into departments to handle relations separately with the 
, 
, 
, and 
. Scholars of Ashanti history, such as 
 and 
, disagree over the power of this sophisticated bureaucracy in comparison to the Asantehene, but agree that it was a sign of a highly developed government with a complex system of 
.

At the top of Ashanti's power structure sat the 
, the King of Ashanti. Each Asantahene was enthroned on the sacred Golden Stool, the Sika 'dwa, an object that came to symbolise the very power of the King. Osei Kwadwo (1764–1777) began the 
 system of appointing central officials according to their ability, rather than their birth.


As King, the 
 held immense power in Ashanti, but did not enjoy 
.
 He was obliged to share considerable legislative and executive powers with Ashanti's sophisticated bureaucracy. But the 
 was the only person in Ashanti permitted to invoke the 
 in cases of crime. During wartime, the King acted as Supreme Commander of the 
, although during the 19th century, the fighting was increasingly handled by the Ministry of War in Kumasi. Each member of the confederacy was also obliged to send annual tribute to Kumasi.

The 
 (King of all Ashanti) reigned over all and was King of the division of Kumasi, the nation's capital, and the Ashanti Empire. He was elected in the same manner as all other chiefs. In this hierarchical structure, every chief or King swore fealty to the one above him—from village and subdivision, to division, to the chief of Kumasi, and finally the 
 swore fealty to the 
.


The 
 circumscribed the power of the 
, and the chiefs of other divisions considerably checked the power of the King. This in practical effect created a system of checks and balances. As the symbol of the nation, the 
 received significant deference ritually, for the context was religious in that he was a symbol of the people in the flesh: the living, dead or yet to be born. When the king committed an act not approved of by the counsel of elders or the people, he could possibly be 
, and demoted to a commoner.


The existence of 
 organizations and the 
 of elders is evidence of an 
 tendency in Ashanti political life. Though older men tended to 
 political power, Ashanti instituted an organization of young men, the 
, that tended to 
 and 
 the political process in the empire. The council of elders undertook actions only after consulting a representative of the 
. Their views were taken seriously as they participated in decision-making in the empire.


The current residence of the Asantehene is the 
 built in 1925 by the British and presented to the 
 as a present upon his return from exile. 


The original palace of the Asantehene in Kumasi was burned down by the British in 1875. From European accounts, the edifice was massive and ornately built. In 1819, English traveler and author, 
 described the palace as 
 ...an immense building of a variety of oblong courts and regular squares [with] 
 exuberantly adorned with bold fan and trellis work of Egyptian character. They have a suite of rooms over them, with small windows of wooden lattice, of intricate but regular carved work, and some have frames cased with thin gold. The squares have a large apartment on each side, open in front, with two supporting pillars, which break the view and give it all the appearance of the proscenium or front of the stage of the older Italian theaters. They are lofty and regular, and the cornices of a very bold cane-work in alto-relievo. A drop-curtain of curiously plaited cane is suspended in front, and in each, we observed chairs and stools embossed with gold, and beds of silk, with scattered regalia.
 
 also described his visit to the Ashanti Royal Palace of Kumasi in 1874:
“We went to the king’s palace, which consists of many courtyards, each surrounded with alcoves and verandahs, and having two gates or doors, so that each yard was a thoroughfare . . . But the part of the palace fronting the street was a stone house, Moorish in its style . . . with a flat roof and a parapet, and suites of apartments on the first floor. It was built by Fanti masons many years ago. The rooms upstairs remind me of Wardour Street. Each was a perfect Old Curiosity Shop. Books in many languages, Bohemian glass, clocks, silver plate, old furniture, Persian rugs, Kidderminster carpets, pictures and engravings, numberless chests and coffers. A sword bearing the inscription From Queen Victoria to the King of Ashantee. A copy of the Times, 17 October 1843. With these were many specimens of Moorish and Ashanti handicraft.”
Odumata's Sleeping Room (1819).

Piazza in the Palace (1819).

Adum Street (1819).

This institution assisted the Asantehene and served as an advisory body to the king. The council was made up of 
 or paramount chiefs who were leaders of the various Ashanti states. The council also included other provincial chiefs. By law the Asantehene never ignored the decisions of the Asanteman council. Doing so could get him  de-stooled from the throne.


The Ashanti Empire was made up of metropolitan and provincial states. The metropolitan states were made up of Ashanti citizens known as 
. The provincial states were other kingdoms absorbed into the empire. Every metropolitan Ashanti state was headed by the 
 or paramount chief. Each of these paramount chiefs served as principal rulers of their own states, where they exerted executive, legislative and judicial powers.


The 
 were divisional chiefs under the Amanhene. Their major function was to advise the Amanhene. The divisional chiefs were the highest order in various Ashanti state divisions. The divisions were made up of various villages put together. Examples of divisional chiefs included Krontihene, Nifahene, Benkumhene, Adontenhene and Kyidomhene.


Each village in Asante had a chief called Odikro who was the owner of the village. The Odikro was responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He also served as a medium between the people of his jurisdiction, the ancestor and the gods. As the head of the village, the Odikro presided over the village council.


The queen or 
 was an important figure in Ashanti political systems. She was the most powerful female in the Empire. She had the prerogative of being consulted in the process of installing a chief or the king, as she played a major role in the nomination and selection. She settled disputes involving women and was involved in decision-making alongside the Council of elders and chiefs.
 Not only did she participate in the judicial and legislative processes, but also in the making and unmaking of war, and the distribution of land.


Successful entrepreneurs who accumulated large wealth and men as well as distinguished themselves through heroic deeds were awarded social and political recognition by being called "Abirempon" or "Obirempon" which means big men. By the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries AD, the appellation "Abirempon" had formalized and politicized to embrace those who conducted trade from which the whole state benefited. The state rewarded entrepreneurs who attained such accomplishments with Mena (elephant tail) which was the "heraldic badge" 
 
s had a fair amount of legislative power in their regions, more than the local nobles of Dahomey but less than the regional governors of the Oyo Empire. In addition to handling the region's administrative and economic matters, the 
 also acted as the Supreme Judge of their jurisdiction, presiding over court cases.

The Kotoko was a government council in the Ashanti government. 
Politically, the kotoko council served as the counterweight to the king's council of elders and basically embodied the aristocratic party in the government. The council formed the Legislature of Ashanti governmental system.
 It was made up of the Asantehene, the Queen mother as well as the state chiefs and their ministers.

The 
 of Kings and the Asantehene (
 ) himself followed a pattern. The senior female of the kingly lineage nominated the eligible males. This senior female then consulted the elders, male and female, of that line. The final candidate is then selected. That nomination was sent to a council of elders, who represented other lineages in the 
 or 
.


The Elders then presented the nomination to the assembled people. If the assembled 
 disapproved of the nominee, the process was restarted.
 Chosen, the new Kings were enstooled by the Elders, who admonished him with expectations. The chosen Kings swore a solemn oath to the 
 and to his ancestors to fulfill his duties honorably in which he 
 himself and his life for the betterment of the state.


This elected and enstooled King enjoyed a great majestic 
 with much spectacle and celebration. He reigned with much 
 power, including the ability to make judgments of life and death on his subjects. However, he did not enjoy 
. Upon the stool, the King was sacred. He served as the holy intermediary between the people and the ancestors. His powers theoretically were more apparent than real and hinged on his attention to the advice and decisions of the Council of Elders.


Kings of the Ashanti Empire who violated any of the 
 taken during his or her enstoolment, were destooled by Kingmakers.
 For instance, if a king punished citizens arbitrarily or was exposed as corrupt, he would be destooled. Destoolment entailed kingmakers removing the sandals of the king and bumping his buttocks on the ground three times. Once destooled from office, his sanctity and thus reverence were lost, as he could not exercise any of the powers he had as king; this includes Chief administrator, Judge, and Military Commander. The now previous king was dispossessed of the Stool, swords and other 
 which symbolized his office and authority. 
He also lost his position as custodian of the land. However, even if destooled from office, the king remained a member of the royal family from which he was elected.
 An impeachment occurred during the reign of 
, caused by a 
.


 was responsible for creating the 
 which served as the  
 constitution of the Ashanti Empire.


The Ashanti state, in effect, was a 
. It invokes religious, rather than 
-legal postulates. What the modern state views as 
, Ashanti view practically as 
. Antisocial acts disrespect the ancestors, and are only secondarily harmful to the 
. If the chief or 
 fails to punish such acts, he invokes the anger of the ancestors and the gods, and is therefore in danger of 
. The penalty for some crimes (sins) is death, but this is seldom imposed; a more common penalty is 
 or 
.
 The King typically exacts or 
 all 
. These commuted sentences by King and chiefs sometimes occur by 
 or 
; they are regulated in such a way that they should not be mistaken for 
, but are considered as 
 to the state, which for the most part welcomes 
 and 
. 
 tend to be far more frequent than 
.


Ashanti are repulsed by 
, and 
 is considered murder. They decapitate those who commit suicide, the conventional punishment for murder. The suicide thus had contempt for the court, for only the King may kill an Ashanti.


In a 
 
, intent must be established. If the 
 is accidental, the murderer pays compensation to the lineage of the deceased. The 
 cannot be executed because of the absence of responsible intent – except for murder or cursing the King; in the case of cursing the king, drunkenness is a valid defense. 
 include murder, 
 within the female or male line, and intercourse with a 
 woman, 
 of a married woman, and 
 with any of the wives of a chief or the King. 
 or insults of a chief or the 
 or the King also carried 
.


Cursing the King, calling down powers to harm the King, is considered an unspeakable act and carries the weight of 
. One who invokes another to commit such an act must pay a heavy indemnity. Practitioners of harmful (evil) forms of 
 and witchcraft receive death but not by decapitation, for their blood must not be shed. They receive execution by strangling, burning, or drowning.


Ordinarily, families or lineages settle disputes between individuals. Nevertheless, such disputes can be brought to 
 before a chief by uttering the 
 oath of a chief or the King. In the end, the 
 is the sentencing court, for only the King can order the 
. Before the Council of Elders and the King's Court, the litigants orate comprehensively. Anyone present can cross-examine the defendant or the accuser, and if the proceedings do not lead to a 
, a special witness is called to provide additional 
. If there is only one witness, their sworn oath assures the truth is told. Moreover, that he favours or is hostile to either litigant is unthinkable. Cases with no witness, like sorcery or adultery are settled by ordeals, like drinking 
.


 establishes the Ashanti 
, and it provides the principal foundation for 
 sanctions. The link between mother and child centres the entire network, which includes ancestors and fellow men as well. Its 
 emphasizes the Ashanti conception of rectitude and good 
, which favours harmony among the people. The rules were made by 
 (Supreme 
) and the ancestors, and one must behave accordingly.


The Ashanti Empire was one of a series of states along the coast including Dahomey, 
, and 
. The Ashanti had mountains and large 
 surpluses.
 The southern part of the Ashanti Empire was covered with moist semi-
 whilst the 
 covered the northern part of the state. The Guinea Savanna consists of short deciduous and fire resistant trees. 
 also occur along the 
 and streams of the savanna zone. Soils in Ashanti were mainly of two types; 
 ochrosols in the southern part of Ashanti whilst the 
 ochrosols were confined to northern part of the empire.


The predominant 
 or food rich wildlife and animal species encountered in the Ashanti Empire were the 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and the 
 which became the national emblem of the state, as well as about thirty multipurpose 
 species of trees and 
 and over thirty-five ornamental plants which beautified the environs of Ashanti. These tree/shrub-crop-animal (hen/fish) components were intensively integrated spatially and/or sequentially on the same land unit of individual Ashanti houses.


Between 1700 and 1715, Osei Tutu I conquered the neighboring states of 
, 
 and Aowin. 
 who succeeded Osei Tutu, led the integration of Akan states such as 
, 
 and 
 into Ashanti after embarking on wars of conquest between 1720 to 1750. After the conquest of the Akyem in 1742, the Ashanti exerted power unto the coast. From 1730 to 1770, the Ashanti Empire expanded north into the Savannah states of 
, 
 and Krakye.
 
By 1816, the Ashanti had absorbed coastal states such as the 
.
 The expansion into Dagbon is refuted by some researchers such as A.A. Lliasu. Scholar Karl J. Haas argues that "claims of Asante dominance over Dagbon in the
precolonial era have been greatly exagged."


The lands within the Ashanti Kingdom were also rich in river-
, 
 and 
, and the Ashanti were soon trading with the 
 at coastal fort 
, later 
,and with the 
 states.


The Ashanti prepared the fields by burning before the onset of the rainy season and cultivated with an iron 
. Fields are left fallow for a couple years, usually after two to four years of cultivation. Plants cultivated include 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and many 
. Manioc and corn are New World transplants introduced during the 
. Many of these 
 crops could be harvested twice a year and the 
 (manioc), after a two-year growth, provides a starchy root.



The Ashanti transformed 
, maize and millet into 
, a favourite drink; and made use of the oil from palm for many culinary and domestic uses.
 
The Ashanti invented the 
, an Asante 
, and they also invented the 
. They drummed messages to distances of over 300 kilometres (200 mi), as rapidly as a 
. 
 (Twi) and 
, the language of the 
 is tonal and more meaning is generated by tone. The drums reproduced these tones, punctuations, and the accents of a phrase so that the cultivated ear heard the entirety of the phrase itself.

The Ashanti readily heard and understood the phrases produced by these "talking drums". Standard phrases called for meetings of the chiefs or to arms, warned of danger, and broadcast announcements of the death of important figures. Some drums were used for 
 and ceremonial presentations.


Although pre-literate, the Ashanti recruited literate individuals into its government to increase the efficiency of the state's diplomacy. Some written records were also kept.
 Historian Adjaye, gives estimates based on surviving letters by the Ashanti that documents from the Ashanti government "could have exceeded several thousands."
 Writing was also used in record keeping during 
. Bowdich documented in the early nineteenth century about the "trial of Apea Nyano" on 8 July 1817 where he states that "the 
 secretaries were there to take notes of the transactions of the day." Wilks adds that such transcripts have not survived today.


The population history of the Ashanti Kingdom was one of slow centralization. In the early 19th century the Asantehene used the annual tribute to set up a permanent standing army armed with 
, which allowed much closer control of the Ashanti Kingdom. The Ashanti Kingdom was one of the most centralised states in sub-Saharan Africa. Osei Tutu and his successors oversaw a policy of political and cultural unification and the union had reached its full extent by 1750. It remained an alliance of several large city-states which acknowledged the sovereignty of the ruler of Kumasi and the Ashanti Kingdom, known as the Asantehene. The Ashanti Kingdom had dense populations, allowing the creation of substantial 
.
 The Ashanti controlled over 250,000 square kilometers while ruling approximately 3 million people.


The Ashanti traditional buildings are the only remnants of Ashanti architecture. Construction and design consisted of a timber framework filled up with clay and 
 with sheaves of leaves. The surviving designated sites are 
, but there have been many other buildings in the past with the same architectural style.
 These buildings served as 
 and 
 as well as houses for the affluent.
 The Ashanti Empire also built 
 which housed the tombs of several Ashanti leaders.
Generally, houses whether designed for human habitation or for the 
, consisted of four separate rectangular single-room buildings set around an open 
; the inner corners of adjacent buildings were linked by means of splayed screen walls, whose sides and  angles could be adapted to allow for any inaccuracy in the initial layout. Typically, three of the buildings were completely open to the courtyard, while the fourth was partially enclosed, either by the door and windows, or by open-work  screens flanking an opening.
 

Infrastructure such as 
 and 
 throughout the empire was maintained via a network of well-kept 
 from the Ashanti mainland to the 
 and other trade cities.
 English visitors to Kumasi in the 19th century, noted the division of the capital into 77 wards with 77 main streets; one of which was 100 yards wide. Many houses especially those near the king's stone palace were two story buildings embodied with indoor 
 in the form of toilets that were flushed with gallons of boiling water.
 Bowdich revealed in his 1817 account that all streets of Kumasi 
.
 Stationed at various points of Ashanti roads were the 
 or road wardens who served as the highway police; checking the movement of traders and strangers on all roads. They were also responsible for scouting and were charged with the collection of 
 from traders.
 The Ashanti Empire also built 
 across water bodies for transport. Asantehene 
 ordered his engineers to build proper bridges above streams in the Metropolitan cities of Ashanti. 
, who visited the empire in the 19th century, described the construction as:

Some stout, forked sticks or posts are driven in the centre of the stream at convenient distances, across which are placed some strong beams, fastened to the posts with withes, from the numerous climbing plants on every hand. On these bearers are placed long stout poles which are covered with earth from fourth to six inches thick....
The 
 inherited his position from his queen mother, and he was assisted at the capital, Kumasi, by a civil service of men talented in 
, 
, and the 
, with a head called the 
.
 Men from the 
, 
, and 
 were employed in the Ashanti empire 
; all of whom were appointed by the 
.
 In the metropolitan areas of Ashanti, several 
 were responsible for maintaining law and order. In Kumasi, a uniformed police, who were distinguished by their long hair, maintained order by ensuring no one else entered and left the city without permission from the government.
 The 
 or 
 were used as the empire's 
 and 
 to the Asantehene, as sources of 
, and to suppress rebellion.
  For most of the 19th century and into the 20th century, the Ashanti 
 remained powerful.


The Ashanti armies served the empire well, supporting its long period of expansion and subsequent resistance to European colonization. 
Armament was primarily with firearms, but some historians hold that indigenous organization and leadership probably played a more crucial role in Ashanti successes.
 These are, perhaps, more significant when considering that the Ashanti had numerous troops from conquered or incorporated peoples, and faced a number of revolts and rebellions from these peoples over its long history. The political genius of the symbolic "golden stool" and the fusing effect of a national army however, provided the unity needed to keep the empire viable. Total potential strength was some 80,000 to 200,000, making the Ashanti army bigger than the well known Zulu, and comparable to possibly Africa's largest – the legions of Ethiopia.
 The Ashanti army was described as a fiercely organized one whose king could "bring 200,000 men into the field and whose warriors were evidently not cowed by 
 and 7-pounder guns"

While actual forces deployed in the field were less than 
 strength, tens of thousands of soldiers were usually available to serve the needs of the empire. Mobilization depended on small cadres of regulars, who guided and directed levees and contingents called up from provincial governors.

Organization was structured around an advance guard, main body, rear guard and two right and left wing flanking elements. This provided flexibility in the forest country the Ashanti armies typically operated in. Horses were known to survive in Kumasi but because they could not survive in the tsetse fly-infested forest zone in the south, there was no cavalry. Ashanti high ranking officers rode horses with the hauteur of European officers but they did not ride to battle.
 The approach to the battlefield was typically via converging columns, and tactics included ambushes and extensive maneuvers on the wings. Unique among African armies, the Ashanti deployed medical units to support their fighters. This force was to expand the empire substantially and continually for over a century, and defeated the British in several encounters.


Brass barrel blunderbuss were produced in some states in the Gold Coast including the Ashanti Empire around the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Various accounts indicate that Asante blacksmiths were not only able to repair firearms, but that barrels, locks and stocks were on occasion remade.


From 1806 until 1896, the Ashanti state was in a perpetual state of war involving expansion or defense of its domain. Ashanti exploits against other African forces made it the paramount power in the region. Its impressive performance against the British also earned it the respect of European powers.

In 1806, the Ashanti pursued two rebel leaders through Fante territory to the coast. The British refusal to surrender the rebels led to an Ashanti attack. This was devastating enough that the British handed over a rebel; the other escaped.
 In 1807 disputes with the 
 led to the 
, in which the Ashanti were victorious under Asantehene Osei Bonsu ("Bonsu, the whale").

In the 1811 
, a coalition of Asante and Ga fought against an alliance of Fante, Akwapim and Akim states.  The Asante war machine was successful in defeating the alliance in open combat pushing their enemies towards the  Akwapim hills. Ashanti however abandoned their campaign of pursuit after capturing a British fort and establishing their presence and authority on the coast.

In 1814 the Ashanti launched an invasion of the Gold Coast, largely to gain access to European traders. In the 
, the empire faced the Akim–Akwapim alliance. After several battles, the out numbered Akim–Akwapim alliance were defeated and became tributories to the Ashantis. The Ashanti was established from the midlands down to the coast.

The first of the 
 occurred in 1823. In these conflicts, the Ashanti empire faced off, with varying degrees of success, against the British Empire residing on the coast. The root of the conflict traces back to 1823 when Sir 
, resisting all overtures by the Ashanti to negotiate, led an invading force.  The Ashanti defeated this, killed MacCarthy, took his head for a trophy and swept on to the coast. However, disease forced them back. The Ashanti were so successful in subsequent fighting that in 1826 they again moved on the coast. The Ashanti were stopped about 15 kilometres (10 mi) north of Accra by a British led force. They fought against superior numbers of British allied forces, including Denkyirans until the novelty of British rockets caused the Ashanti army to flee.
 In 1831, a treaty led to 30 years of peace, with the 
 accepted as the border.

With the exception of a few Ashanti light skirmishes across the Pra in 1853 and 1854, the peace between the Ashanti  and British Empire had remained unbroken for over 30 years. Then, in 1863, a large Ashanti delegation crossed the river pursuing a fugitive, Kwesi Gyana. There was fighting, casualties on both sides, but the governor's request for troops from England was declined and sickness forced the withdrawal of his West Indian troops. The war ended in 1864 as a stalemate with both sides losing more men to sickness than any other factor.

In 1869 a European missionary family was taken to Kumasi. They were hospitably welcomed and were used as an excuse for war in 1873. Also, Britain took control of Ashanti land claimed by the Dutch. The Ashanti invaded the new British protectorate. 
 and his famous 
 were sent against the Ashanti. This was a modern war, replete with press coverage (including by the renowned reporter 
) and printed precise military and medical instructions to the troops.
 The British government refused appeals to interfere with British armaments manufacturers who were unrestrained in selling to both sides.


All Ashanti attempts at negotiations were disregarded. Wolseley took 2,500 British troops and several thousand West Indian and African troops to Kumasi. It arrived in Kumasi in January 1896 along a route cleared by an advance contingent under the command of 
.
 The capital was briefly occupied. The British were impressed by the size of the palace and the scope of its contents, including "rows of books in many languages."
 The Ashanti had abandoned the capital after a bloody war. The British burned it.


The British and their allies suffered considerable casualties in the war losing numerous soldiers and high ranking army officers.
 but in the end the firepower was too much to overcome for the Ashanti.  The Asantehene (the king of the Ashanti) signed a British treaty in July 1874 to end the war.

In 1895, the Ashanti turned down an unofficial offer to become a British protectorate.

The Ashanti wanting to keep French and European colonial forces out of the territory (and its gold), the British were anxious to conquer the Ashanti once and for all. Despite being in talks with the state about making it a British protectorate, Britain began the Fourth Anglo-Ashanti War in 1895 on the pretext of failure to pay the fines levied on the Ashanti monarch after the 1874 war. The British were victorious and the Ashanti was forced to sign a treaty.

Standing among families was largely political. The royal family typically topped the hierarchy, followed by the families of the 
 of territorial divisions. In each 
, a particular female line provides the chief. A committee of several men eligible for the post elects the chief. The typical Ashanti family was 
 and 
.
 A mother's brother was the legal guardian of her children. The father on the other hand had fewer legal responsibilities for his children with the exception of ensuring their well-being. Women also had the right to initiate 
 whiles the husband had some legal rights over his wife such as the right to cut off her nose for adultery.


Prominent people wore silk. The ordinary Ashanti wore cotton whiles slaves dressed in black cloth. Garments signalled the rank of the wearer in society and its colour expressed different meanings. White was worn by ordinary people after winning a court case. Dark colours were worn for funerals or mourning.
 Laws existed to restrict certain Kente designs to the nobility. Some cotton or silk patterns on the Kente were designed solely for the king and could only be worn with his permission.


Education in the Ashanti Kingdom was conducted by Asante and imported scholars and Ashanti people would often attend schools in Europe for their 
.


Tolerant parents are typical among the Ashanti. Childhood is considered a happy time and children cannot be responsible for their actions. The child is not responsible for their actions until after 
. A child is harmless and there is no worry for the control of their 
, the original purpose of all 
, so the ritual funerals typically given to the deceased Ashanti are not as lavish for the children.


The Ashanti adored twins when they were born within the 
 because they were seen as a sign of impending fortune. Ordinarily, boy twins joined the army and twin girls potential wives of the King. If the twins are a boy and girl, no particular career awaits them. Women who bear 
 are greatly honored because three is regarded as a lucky number. Special 
 ensue for the third, sixth, and ninth child. The fifth child (unlucky five) can expect misfortune. Families with many children are well respected and barren women scoffed at.


The Ashanti used 
 in their daily society. The symbols were used as a form of decoration, logos, arts, sculpture and pottery.

The Ashanti held 
 only for females. Fathers instruct their sons without public observance. The privacy of boys was respected in the Ashanti kingdom. As 
 approaches, a girl goes to her mother's house. When the girl's menstruation is disclosed, the mother announces the good news in the village beating an iron hoe with a stone. Old women come out and sing 
 (menstrual) songs.


Menstruating women suffered numerous restrictions. The Ashanti viewed them as ritually unclean. They did not cook for men, nor did they eat any food cooked for a man. If a menstruating woman entered the ancestral stool (shrine) house, she was arrested, and the punishment could result in death. If this punishment is not exacted, the Ashanti believe, the ghost of the 
 would strangle the 
. Menstruating women lived in special houses during their periods as they were forbidden to cross the threshold of men's houses. They swore no 
 and no oaths were sworn for or against them. They did not participate in any of the 
 observances and did not visit any 
 places.


Sickness and death were major events in the 
. The ordinary 
 divined the 
 cause of the illness and treated it with 
.


People loathed being alone for long without someone available to perform this rite before the sick collapsed. The family dressed the deceased in their best clothes, and adorned them with packets of gold dust (money for the after-life), ornaments, and food for the journey "up the hill". The body was normally buried within 24 hours. Until that time the funeral party engage in dancing, drumming, shooting of guns, all accompanied by the wailing of relatives. This was done because the Ashanti typically believed that death was not something to be sad about, but rather a part of life. As the Ashanti believed in an after-life, families felt they would be reunited with their ancestors upon death. Funeral rites for the death of a king involved the whole kingdom and were a much more elaborate affair.


The greatest and most frequent 
 of the Ashanti recalled the spirits of departed rulers with an offering of food and drink, asking their favour for the common good, called the 
. The day before the 
, 
 broadcast the approaching ceremonies. The stool treasurer gathers sheep and liquor that will be offered. The chief priest officiates the 
 in the stool house where the ancestors came. The 
 offers each food and a beverage. The public ceremony occurs outdoors, where all the people joined the dancing. Minstrels chant ritual phrases; the talking drums extol the chief and the ancestors in traditional phrases. The 
, the other large ceremony, occurs in September and typically lasted for a week or two. It is a time of cleansing of sin from society the defilement, and for the purification of 
 of ancestors and the gods. After the 
 and feast of a black 
—of which both the living and the dead share—a new year begins in which all are clean, strong, and healthy.


Slavery was historically a tradition in the Ashanti Empire, with slaves typically taken as captives from enemies in warfare. The Ashanti Empire was the largest slaveowning and slave trading state in the territory of today's Ghana during the 
.
 The welfare of their slaves varied from being able to acquire wealth and intermarry with the master's family to being 
 in funeral ceremonies. The Ashanti believed that slaves would follow their masters into the afterlife. Slaves could sometimes own other slaves, and could also request a new master if the slave believed he or she was being severely mistreated.


The modern-day Ashanti claim that slaves were seldom abused,
 and that a person who abused a slave was held in high contempt by 
. They defend the "humanity" of Ashanti slavery by noting that those slaves were allowed to marry.
 If a master found a female slave desirable, he might marry her. He preferred such an arrangement to that of a free woman in a conventional marriage, because marriage to an enslaved woman allowed the children to inherit some of the father's 
 and status

This favoured arrangement occurred primarily because of what some men considered their conflict with the 
 system. Under this kinship system, children were considered born into the mother's clan and took their status from her family.
 Generally her eldest brother served as mentor to her children, particularly for the boys. She was protected by her family.
 Some Ashanti men felt more comfortable taking a slave girl or pawn wife in marriage, as she would have no 
 (older male grandfather, father, uncle or brother) to intercede on her behalf when the couple argued. With an enslaved wife, the master and husband had total control of their children, as she had no kin in the community.


The Ashanti Empire has been depicted in a number of different works of 
, detailing the structure of the empire

The Ashanti Empire has been depicted in some historical 
, along with being characters in video games with origins from the area




				Pages for logged out editors 

			






 (
),
 officially the 
 (French: 
), is a country in 
-
. It is bordered by 
 to the west and north; 
 to the northeast; the 
 to the east; and 
, 
 and the 
 to the south. Its coastline lies on the 
, part of the 
 and the 
. Due to its strategic position at the crossroads between 
 and 
, it has been categorized as being in both camps. Its nearly 27 million people speak 250 native languages.


Early inhabitants of the territory included the 
 around 
, and the 
 hunter-gatherers in the southeastern rainforest. 
 reached the coast in the 15th century and named the area 
 (
), which became 
 in English. 
 soldiers founded the 
 in the north in the 19th century, and various ethnic groups of the west and northwest established powerful chiefdoms and 
. Cameroon became a 
 in 1884 known as 
. After 
, it was divided between 
 and the 
 as 
. The 
 (UPC) political party advocated independence, but was outlawed by France in the 1950s, leading to the 
 fought between French and UPC militant forces until early 1971. In 1960, the French-administered part of Cameroon became independent, as the Republic of Cameroun, under President 
. The 
 of 
 federated with it in 1961 to form the 
 of Cameroon. The federation was abandoned in 1972. The country was renamed the 
 of Cameroon in 1972 and back to the Republic of Cameroon in 1984 by a presidential decree by president Paul Biya. 
, the incumbent president, has led the country since 1982 following Ahidjo's resignation; he previously held office as prime minister from 1975 on. Cameroon is governed as a 
 
.

The 
 of Cameroon are French and English, the official languages of former 
 and 
. Its 
 is predominantly Christian, with a significant minority 
, and others following 
. It has experienced 
 from the English-speaking territories, where politicians have advocated for greater decentralisation and even complete separation or independence (as in the 
). In 2017, tensions over the creation of an 
 state in the English-speaking territories escalated into 
.

Large numbers of Cameroonians live as 
. The country is often referred to as "Africa in miniature" for its geological, linguistic and cultural diversity.
 Its natural features include 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. Its highest point, at almost 4,100 metres (13,500 ft), is 
 in the 
. Its most populous cities are 
 on the 
, its economic capital and main seaport; 
, its political capital; and 
. 
 in the Southwest has a natural seaport. Cameroon is well known for its native music styles, particularly 
, Njang and 
, and for its successful 
. It is a member state of the 
, the 
, the 
 (OIF), the 
, 
 and the 
.

Originally, Cameroon was the 
 given by the 
 to the 
, which they called 
 meaning "river of 
" or "shrimp river", referring to the then abundant 
.
 Today the country's name in 
 remains 
.

Present-day Cameroon was first settled in the 
 Era. The longest continuous inhabitants are groups such as the 
 (
).
 From there, 
 into eastern, southern and central Africa are believed to have occurred about 2,000 years ago.
 The 
 culture arose around 
, c. 500 AD, and gave way to the Kanem and its successor state, the 
. Kingdoms, 
, and 
 arose in the west.


 reached the coast in 1472. They noted an abundance of the ghost shrimp 
 in the 
 and named it 
 (
), which became 
 in English.
 Over the following few centuries, European interests regularised trade with the coastal peoples, and Christian 
 pushed inland.


The 
 began at the end of the 16th century. Born in Logone-Birni, Cameroon, 
 (
 – 14 May 1781[1]), Russian military engineer, general-in-chief, and nobleman, was kidnapped as a child by Ottomans, traded, presented to Peter the Great, who freed him, adopted and raised him as his godson. His descendants entered the Russian nobility. One of them was Russia's national poet 
.


In the early 19th century, 
 led 
 soldiers on a 
 in the north against non-Muslim and partially Muslim peoples and established the 
. Settled peoples who fled the Fulani caused a major redistribution of population.


In 1896, Sultan 
 created the 
, or Shu Mom, for the 
.
 It is taught in Cameroon today by the 
.


Germany began to establish roots in Cameroon in 1868 when the Woermann Company of Hamburg built a warehouse. It was built on the estuary of the Wouri River. Later Gustav Nachtigal made a treaty with one of the local kings to annex the region for the German emperor.
 The 
 claimed the territory as the colony of 
 in 1884 and began a steady push inland; the natives resisted. Under the aegis of Germany commercial companies were local administrations. These 
 used 
 to run profitable banana, rubber, palm oil, and cocoa plantations.
 Even infrastructure projects relied on forced labor regimen. This economic policy was much criticised by the other colonial powers.


With the defeat of Germany in 
, Kamerun became a 
 territory and was split into 
 (
: 
) and 
 in 1919. France integrated the economy of Cameroon with that of France
 and improved the infrastructure with capital investments and skilled workers, modifying the colonial system of forced labour.


The British administered their territory from neighbouring 
. Natives complained that this made them a neglected "colony of a colony". Nigerian migrant workers flocked to Southern Cameroons, ending forced labour altogether but angering the local natives, who felt swamped.
 The League of Nations mandates were converted into 
 in 1946, and the question of independence became a pressing issue in French Cameroon.


France outlawed the pro-independence political party, the 
 (
; UPC), on 13 July 1955.
 This prompted a 
 waged by the UPC and the assassination of several of the party's leaders, including 
, 
 and 
. In the British Cameroons, the question was whether to reunify with French Cameroon or join Nigeria; the British ruled out the option of independence.


On 1 January 1960, French Cameroun gained independence from France under President 
. On 1 October 1961, the formerly British 
 gained independence from the United Kingdom by vote of the UN General Assembly and joined with French Cameroun to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon, a date which is now observed as 
, a 
.
 Ahidjo used the ongoing war with the UPC to concentrate power in the presidency, continuing with this even after the suppression of the UPC in 1971.


His political party, the 
 (CNU), became the sole legal political party on 1 September 1966 and on 20 May 1972, a referendum was passed to abolish the 
 in favour of a United Republic of Cameroon, headed from 
.
 This day is now the country's 
, a public holiday.
 Ahidjo pursued an economic policy of 
, prioritising 
 and petroleum development. The government used oil money to create a national cash reserve, pay farmers, and finance major development projects; however, many initiatives failed when Ahidjo appointed unqualified allies to direct them.


The 
 was changed on 20 May 1975. Two stars were removed, replaced with a large central star as a symbol of national unity.

Ahidjo stepped down on 4 November 1982 and left power to his constitutional successor, 
. However, Ahidjo remained in control of the CNU and tried to run the country from behind the scenes until Biya and his allies pressured him into resigning. Biya began his administration by moving toward a more democratic government, but a failed 
 nudged him toward the leadership style of his predecessor.


An 
 took effect in the mid-1980s to late 1990s as a result of international economic conditions, drought, falling 
 prices, and years of corruption, mismanagement, and 
. Cameroon turned to foreign aid, cut government spending, and 
 industries. With the reintroduction of multi-party politics in December 1990, the former British Southern Cameroons pressure groups called for greater autonomy, and the 
 advocated complete secession as the Republic of 
.
 The 1992 Labour Code of Cameroon gives workers the freedom to belong to a trade union or not to belong to any trade union at all. It is the choice of a worker to join any trade union in his occupation since there are more than one trade union in each occupation.


In June 2006, talks concerning a territorial dispute over the 
 peninsula were resolved. The talks involved President Paul Biya of Cameroon, then President 
 of Nigeria and then UN Secretary General 
, and resulted in Cameroonian control of the oil-rich peninsula. The northern portion of the territory was formally handed over to the Cameroonian government in August 2006, and the remainder of the peninsula was left to Cameroon 2 years later, in 2008.
 The boundary change triggered a 
, as many Bakassians refused to accept Cameroonian rule. While most militants laid down their arms in November 2009,
 some carried on fighting for years.


In February 2008, Cameroon experienced its worst violence in 15 years when a transport union strike in Douala escalated into 
 in 31 municipal areas.


In May 2014, in the wake of the 
, presidents Paul Biya of Cameroon and 
 of 
 announced they were waging war on 
, and deployed troops to the Nigerian border.
 Boko Haram launched several attacks into Cameroon, killing 84 civilians in a 
, but suffering a heavy defeat in a 
. Cameroon declared victory over Boko Haram on Cameroonian territory in September 2018.


Since November 2016, protesters from the predominantly English-speaking 
 and 
 regions of the country have been campaigning for continued use of the English language in schools and courts. People were killed and hundreds jailed as a result of these protests.
 In 2017, Biya's government blocked the regions' access to the Internet for three months.
 In September, separatists started 
 for the independence of the Anglophone region as the Federal Republic of 
. The government responded with a military offensive, and the insurgency spread across the Northwest and Southwest regions. As of 2019
, fighting between separatist guerillas and government forces continues.
 During 2020, numerous terrorist attacks—many of them carried out without claims of credit—and government reprisals have led to bloodshed throughout the country.
 Since 2016, more than 450,000 people have fled their homes.
 The conflict indirectly led to an 
 in Boko Haram attacks, as the Cameroonian military largely withdrew from the north to focus on fighting the Ambazonian separatists.


More than 30,000 people in northern Cameroon fled to Chad after ethnic clashes over 
 between 
 fishermen and ethnic 
 herders in December 2021.


The 
 is elected and creates policy, administers government agencies, commands the 
, negotiates and ratifies treaties, and declares a state of emergency.
 The president appoints government officials at all levels, from the 
 (considered the official head of government), to the provincial governors and divisional officers.
 The president is selected by popular vote every seven years.
 There have been 2 presidents since the independence of Cameroon.

The 
 makes legislation. The body consists of 180 members who are elected for five-year terms and meet three times per year.
 Laws are passed on a majority vote.
 The 1996 constitution establishes a second house of parliament, the 100-seat 
. The government recognises the authority of traditional chiefs, fons, and 
 to govern at the local level and to resolve disputes as long as such rulings do not conflict with national law.


Cameroon's legal system is a mixture of 
, 
, and 
.
 Although nominally independent, the judiciary falls under the authority of the executive's 
.
 The president appoints judges at all levels.
 The judiciary is officially divided into tribunals, the 
, and the 
. The National Assembly elects the members of a nine-member 
 that judges high-ranking members of government in the event they are charged with high treason or harming national security.


Cameroon 
 at all levels of government. In 1997, Cameroon established anti-corruption bureaus in 29 ministries, but only 25% became operational,
 and in 2012, 
 placed Cameroon at number 144 on a list of 176 countries ranked from least to most corrupt.
 On 18 January 2006, Biya initiated an anti-corruption drive under the direction of the 
.
 There are several high corruption risk areas in Cameroon, for instance, customs, public health sector and public procurement.
 However, the corruption has gotten worse, regardless of the existing anti-corruption bureaus, as Transparency International ranked Cameroon 152 on a list of 180 countries in 2018.


President Biya's 
 (CPDM) was the only legal political party until December 1990. Numerous regional political groups have since formed. The primary opposition is the 
 (SDF), based largely in the Anglophone region of the country and headed by 
.


Biya and his party have maintained control of the presidency and the National Assembly in national elections, which rivals contend were unfair.
 Human rights organisations allege that the government suppresses the freedoms of opposition groups by preventing demonstrations, disrupting meetings, and arresting opposition leaders and journalists.
 In particular, English-speaking people are discriminated against; protests often escalate into violent clashes and killings.
 In 2017, President Biya shut down the Internet in the English-speaking region for 94 days, at the cost of hampering five million people, including 
 startups.


 ranks Cameroon as "not free" in terms of political rights and civil liberties.
 The last 
 were held on 9 February 2020.


Cameroon is a member of both the 
 and 
.

Its 
 closely follows that of its main ally, France (one of its former colonial rulers).
 Cameroon relies heavily on France for its defence,
 although military spending is high in comparison to other sectors of government.


President Biya has engaged in a decades-long clash with the government of Nigeria over possession of the oil-rich 
 peninsula.
 Cameroon and Nigeria share a 1,000-mile (1,600 km) border and have disputed the sovereignty of the Bakassi peninsula. In 1994 Cameroon petitioned the 
 to resolve the dispute. The two countries attempted to establish a cease-fire in 1996; however, fighting continued for years. In 2002, the ICJ ruled that the 
 gave sovereignty to Cameroon. The ruling called for a withdrawal by both countries and denied the request by Cameroon for compensation due to Nigeria's long-term occupation.
 By 2004, Nigeria had failed to meet the deadline to hand over the peninsula. A UN-mediated summit in June 2006 facilitated an agreement for Nigeria to withdraw from the region and both leaders signed the 
.
 The withdrawal and handover of control was completed by August 2006.


In July 2019, UN ambassadors of 37 countries, including Cameroon, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC defending 
's 
 in the 
 region.


The Cameroon Armed Forces, (French: 
, FAC) consists of the country's army (
), the country's navy (
 (MNR), includes naval infantry), the Cameroonian Air Force (
, AAC), and the 
.


Males and females that are 18 years of age up to 23 years of age and have graduated high school are eligible for military service. Those who join are obliged to complete 4 years of service. There is no conscription in Cameroon, but the government makes periodic calls for volunteers.


Human rights organisations accuse police and military forces of mistreating and even torturing criminal suspects, ethnic minorities, 
, and political activists.
 
 figures indicate that more than 21,000 people have fled to neighboring countries, while 160,000 have been internally displaced by the violence, many reportedly hiding in forests.
 Prisons are overcrowded with little access to adequate food and medical facilities,
 and prisons run by traditional rulers in the north are charged with holding political opponents at the behest of the government.
 However, since the first decade of the 21st century, an increasing number of police and gendarmes have been prosecuted for improper conduct.

On 25 July 2018, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 
 expressed deep concern about reports of violations and abuses in the English-speaking Northwest and Southwest regions of Cameroon.


 are banned by section 347-1 of the penal code with a penalty of from 6 months up to 5 years' imprisonment.


Since December 2020, 
 claimed that Islamist armed group Boko Haram has stepped up attacks and killed at least 80 civilians in towns and villages in the Far North region of Cameroon.


The 
 divides Cameroon into 10 semi-autonomous regions, each under the administration of an elected 
. Each region is headed by a presidentially appointed governor.


These leaders are charged with implementing the will of the president, reporting on the general mood and conditions of the regions, administering the civil service, keeping the peace, and overseeing the heads of the smaller administrative units. Governors have broad powers: they may order propaganda in their area and call in the army, 
, and police.
 All local government officials are employees of the central government's Ministry of Territorial Administration, from which local governments also get most of their budgets.


The regions are subdivided into 58 divisions (French 
). These are headed by presidentially appointed divisional officers (
). The divisions are further split into sub-divisions (
), headed by assistant divisional officers (
). The districts, administered by district heads (
), are the smallest administrative units.


The three northernmost regions are the 
 (
), 
 (
), and 
 (
). Directly south of them are the 
 (
) and 
 (
). The 
 (
) lies on the Gulf of Guinea and the southern border. Cameroon's western region is split into four smaller regions: the 
 (
) and 
 (
) regions are on the coast, and the 
 (
) and 
 (
) regions are in the western grassfields.


At 475,442 square kilometres (183,569 sq mi), Cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest country.
 The country is located in 
 and West Africa, known as the hinge of Africa, on the 
, part of the 
 and the Atlantic Ocean.
 Cameroon lies between latitudes 
 and 
, and longitudes 
 and 
. Cameroon controls 12 nautical miles of the Atlantic Ocean.

Tourist literature describes Cameroon as "Africa in miniature" because it exhibits all major climates and vegetation of the continent: coast, desert, mountains, rainforest, and savanna.
 The country's neighbours are Nigeria and the 
 to the west; 
 to the northeast; the 
 to the east; and 
, 
 and the 
 to the south.


Cameroon is divided into five major geographic zones distinguished by dominant physical, climatic, and vegetative features. The coastal plain extends 15 to 150 kilometres (9 to 93 mi) inland from the Gulf of Guinea
 and has an average elevation of 90 metres (295 ft).
 Exceedingly hot and humid with a short 
, this belt is densely forested and includes some of the 
 on earth, part of the 
.


The 
 rises from the coastal plain to an average elevation of 650 metres (2,133 ft).
 Equatorial rainforest dominates this region, although its alternation between 
 and dry seasons makes it less humid than the coast. This area is part of the 
 
.


An irregular chain of mountains, hills, and plateaus known as the 
 extends from 
 on the coast—Cameroon's highest point at 4,095 metres (13,435 ft)
—almost to 
 at Cameroon's northern border at 13°05'N. This region has a mild climate, particularly on the 
, although rainfall is high. Its soils are among Cameroon's most fertile, especially around volcanic Mount Cameroon.
 Volcanism here has created 
. On 21 August 1986, one of these, 
, belched carbon dioxide and killed between 1,700 and 2,000 people.
 This area has been delineated by the 
 as the 
 ecoregion.


The southern plateau rises northward to the grassy, rugged 
. This feature stretches from the western mountain area and forms a barrier between the country's north and south. Its average elevation is 1,100 metres (3,609 ft),
 and its average temperature ranges from 22 °C (71.6 °F) to 25 °C (77 °F) with high rainfall between April and October peaking in July and August.
 The 
 extends from the edge of the Adamawa to Lake Chad with an average elevation of 300 to 350 metres (984 to 1,148 ft).
 Its characteristic vegetation is savanna scrub and grass. This is an arid region with sparse rainfall and high median temperatures.


Cameroon has four patterns of drainage. In the south, the principal rivers are the 
, 
, 
, and Wouri. These flow southwestward or westward directly into the Gulf of Guinea. The 
 and 
 drain southeastward into the 
. In northern Cameroon, the 
 runs north and west and empties into the 
. The 
 flows northward into Lake Chad, which Cameroon shares with three neighbouring countries.


Cameroon's per capita GDP (
) was estimated as US$3,700 in 2017. Major 
 markets include the Netherlands, France, China, Belgium, Italy, Algeria, and Malaysia.


Cameroon has had a decade of strong economic performance, with GDP growing at an average of 4% per year. During the 2004–2008 period, public debt was reduced from over 60% of GDP to 10% and official reserves quadrupled to over US$3 billion.
 Cameroon is part of the 
 (of which it is the dominant economy),
 the 
 (UDEAC) and the 
 (OHADA).
 Its currency is the 
.


Unemployment was estimated at 3.38% in 2019,
 and 23.8% of the population was living below the international 
 of US$1.90 a day in 2014.
 Since the late 1980s, Cameroon has been following programmes advocated by the 
 and 
 (IMF) to reduce poverty, privatise industries, and increase economic growth.
 The government has taken measures to encourage 
 in the country.


An estimated 70% of the population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 16.7% of GDP in 2017.
 Most agriculture is done at the subsistence scale by local farmers using simple tools. They sell their surplus produce, and some maintain separate fields for commercial use. Urban centres are particularly reliant on peasant agriculture for their foodstuffs. Soils and climate on the coast encourage extensive commercial cultivation of bananas, cocoa, oil palms, rubber, and tea. Inland on the South Cameroon Plateau, cash crops include coffee, sugar, and tobacco. Coffee is a major cash crop in the western highlands, and in the north, natural conditions favour crops such as cotton, groundnuts, and rice. Production of 
 was initiated in Cameroon in 2004.


Livestock are raised throughout the country.
 Fishing employs 5,000 people and provides over 100,000 tons of seafood each year.
 
, long a staple food for rural Cameroonians, is today a delicacy in the country's urban centres. The commercial bushmeat trade has now surpassed deforestation as the main threat to wildlife in Cameroon.


The southern rainforest has vast timber reserves, estimated to cover 37% of Cameroon's total land area.
 However, large areas of the forest are difficult to reach. Logging, largely handled by foreign-owned firms,
 provides the government US$60 million a year in taxes (as of 1998
), and laws mandate the safe and sustainable exploitation of timber. Nevertheless, in practice, the industry is one of the least regulated in Cameroon.


Factory-based industry accounted for an estimated 26.5% of GDP in 2017.
 More than 75% of Cameroon's industrial strength is located in 
 and 
. Cameroon possesses substantial mineral resources, but these are not extensively mined (see 
).
 Petroleum exploitation has fallen since 1986, but this is still a substantial sector such that dips in prices have a strong effect on the economy.
 Rapids and waterfalls obstruct the southern rivers, but these sites offer opportunities for hydroelectric development and supply most of Cameroon's energy. The Sanaga River powers the largest hydroelectric station, located at Edéa. The rest of Cameroon's energy comes from oil-powered thermal engines. Much of the country remains without reliable power supplies.


 is often difficult. Only 6.6% of the roadways are tarred.
 Roadblocks often serve little other purpose than to allow police and gendarmes to collect bribes from travellers.
 Road banditry has long hampered transport along the eastern and western borders, and since 2005, the problem has intensified in the east as the 
 has further destabilised.


 run by multiple private companies connect all major cities. They are the most popular means of transportation followed by the rail service 
. Rail service runs from 
 in the west to 
 in the east and north to 
.
 International airports are located in 
 and 
, with a third under construction in 
.
 Douala is the country's principal seaport.
 In the north, the Bénoué River is seasonally navigable from Garoua across into Nigeria.


Although press freedoms have improved since the first decade of the 21st century, the press is corrupt and beholden to special interests and political groups.
 Newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals.
 The major radio and television stations are state-run and other 
, such as land-based telephones and telegraphs, are largely under government control.
 However, cell phone networks and Internet providers have increased dramatically since the first decade of the 21st century
 and are largely unregulated.


The population of Cameroon was 27,198,628 in 2021.
 The life expectancy was 62.3 years (60.6 years for males and 64 years for females).


Cameroon has slightly more women (50.5%) than men (49.5%). Over 60% of the population is under age 25. People over 65 years of age account for only 3.11% of the total population.


Cameroon's population is almost evenly divided between urban and rural dwellers.
 Population density is highest in the large urban centres, the western highlands, and the northeastern plain.
 Douala, Yaoundé, and 
 are the largest cities. In contrast, the Adamawa Plateau, southeastern Bénoué depression, and most of the South Cameroon Plateau are sparsely populated.


According to the 
, the 
 was 4.8 in 2013 with a population growth rate of 2.56%.


People from the overpopulated western highlands and the underdeveloped north are moving to the coastal plantation zone and urban centres for employment.
 Smaller movements are occurring as workers seek employment in lumber mills and plantations in the south and east.
 Although the national sex ratio is relatively even, these out-migrants are primarily males, which leads to unbalanced ratios in some regions.


Both 
 and 
 marriage are practised, and the average Cameroonian family is large and extended.
 In the north, women tend to the home, and men herd cattle or work as farmers. In the south, women grow the family's food, and men provide meat and grow cash crops. Cameroonian society is male-dominated, and violence and discrimination against women is common.


The number of distinct ethnic and linguistic groups in Cameroon is estimated to be between 230 and 282.
 The Adamawa Plateau broadly bisects these into northern and southern divisions. The northern peoples are 
 groups, who live in the central highlands and the northern lowlands, and the 
, who are spread throughout northern Cameroon. A small number of 
 Arabs live near Lake Chad. Southern Cameroon is inhabited by speakers of 
 and 
 languages. Bantu-speaking groups inhabit the coastal and equatorial zones, while speakers of Semi-Bantu languages live in the Western grassfields. Some 5,000 Gyele and Baka 
 roam the southeastern and coastal rainforests or live in small, roadside settlements.
 Nigerians make up the largest group of foreign nationals.


In 2007, Cameroon hosted approximately 97,400 refugees and asylum seekers. Of these, 49,300 were from the Central African Republic (many driven west by war),
 41,600 from 
, and 2,900 from 
.
 Kidnappings of Cameroonian citizens by Central African bandits have increased since 2005.


In the first months of 2014, thousands of refugees fleeing the violence in the 
 arrived in Cameroon.


On 4 June 2014, AlertNet reported:

Almost 90,000 people have fled to neighbouring Cameroon since December and up to 2,000 a week, mostly women and children, are still crossing the border, the United Nations said.

"Women and children are arriving in Cameroon in a shocking state, after weeks, sometimes months, on the road, foraging for food," said 
, executive director of the 
 (WFP).


Both English and French are official languages, although French is by far the most understood language (more than 80%).
 German, the language of the original colonisers, has long since been displaced by French and English. 
 is the lingua franca in the formerly British-administered territories.
 A mixture of English, French, and Pidgin called 
 has been gaining popularity in urban centres since the mid-1970s.
 The government encourages bilingualism in English and French, and as such, official government documents, new legislation, ballots, among others, are written and provided in both languages. As part of the initiative to encourage bilingualism in Cameroon, six of the eight universities in the country are entirely bilingual.


In addition to the colonial languages, there are approximately 250 other languages spoken by nearly 20 million Cameroonians.
 It is because of this that Cameroon is considered one of the most linguistically diverse countries in the world.


Many Memorandums of Understanding have been signed with Germany for the study of German, which still enjoys huge popularity among pupils and students, with 300,000 people learning or speaking German in Cameroon in 2010. Today, Cameroon is one of the African countries with the highest number of people with knowledge of German.


In the northern regions of the 
, the 
, and 
, the Fulani language 
 is the lingua franca with French merely serving as an administrative language. However, 
 in the Far North region's department of 
 acts as the lingua franca irrespective of ethnic groups.


In 2017 there were language protests by the anglophone population against perceived oppression by francophone speakers.
 The military was deployed against the protesters and people were killed, hundreds imprisoned and thousands fled the country.
 This culminated in the declaration of an independent 
,
 which has since evolved into the 
.
 It is estimated that by June 2020, 740,000 people had been internally displaced as a result of this crisis.


Cameroon has a high level of 
 and diversity.
 The predominant faith is 
, practised by about two-thirds of the population, while 
 is a significant minority faith, adhered to by about one-fourth. In addition, traditional faiths are practised by many. Muslims are most concentrated in the north, while Christians are concentrated primarily in the southern and western regions, but practitioners of both faiths can be found throughout the country.
 Large cities have significant populations of both groups.
 Muslims in Cameroon are divided into 
, 
,
 
, and 
.


People from the North-West and South-West provinces, which used to be a part of 
, have the highest proportion of Protestants. The French-speaking regions of the southern and western regions are largely Catholic.
 Southern ethnic groups predominantly follow Christian or traditional African 
 beliefs, or a 
 combination of the two. People widely believe in witchcraft, and the government outlaws such practices.
 Suspected witches are often subject to mob violence.
 The Islamist jihadist group 
 has been reported as operating in North Cameroon.


In the northern regions, the locally dominant 
 ethnic group is mostly Muslim, but the overall population is fairly evenly divided among Muslims, Christians, and followers of indigenous religious beliefs (called 
 ("pagan") by the Fulani).
 The 
 ethnic group of the West Region is largely Muslim.
 Native traditional religions are practised in rural areas throughout the country but rarely are practised publicly in cities, in part because many indigenous religious groups are intrinsically local in character.


In 2013, the total adult 
 rate of Cameroon was estimated to be 71.3%. Among youths age 15–24 the literacy rate was 85.4% for males and 76.4% for females.
 Most children have access to state-run schools that are cheaper than private and religious facilities.
 The educational system is a mixture of British and French precedents
 with most instruction in English or French.


Cameroon has one of the highest school attendance rates in Africa.
 Girls attend school less regularly than boys do because of cultural attitudes, domestic duties, early marriage, pregnancy, and sexual harassment. Although attendance rates are higher in the south,
 a disproportionate number of teachers are stationed there, leaving northern schools chronically understaffed.
 In 2013, the primary school enrollment rate was 93.5%.


School attendance in Cameroon is also affected by 
. Indeed, the 
 Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor reported that 56% of children aged 5 to 14 were working children and that almost 53% of children aged 7 to 14 combined work and school.
 In December 2014, a 
 issued by the 
 mentioned Cameroon among the countries that resorted to child labor in the production of cocoa.


The quality of health care is generally low.
 Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 56 years in 2012, with 48 healthy life years expected.
 Fertility rate remains high in Cameroon with an average of 4.8 births per woman and an average mother's age of 19.7 years old at first birth.
 In Cameroon, there is only one doctor for every 5,000 people, according to the World Health Organization.
 In 2014, just 4.1% of total GDP expenditure was allocated to healthcare.
 Due to financial cuts in the health care system, there are few professionals. Doctors and nurses who were trained in Cameroon, emigrate because in Cameroon the payment is poor while the workload is high. Nurses are unemployed even though their help is needed. Some of them help out voluntarily so they will not lose their skills.
 Outside the major cities, facilities are often dirty and poorly equipped.


In 2012, the top three deadly diseases were 
, 
, and 
 diseases.
 Endemic diseases include 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.
 The 
/
 prevalence rate in 2016 was estimated at 3.8% for those aged 15–49,
 although a strong stigma against the illness keeps the number of reported cases artificially low.
 46,000 children under age 14 were estimated to be living with HIV in 2016. In Cameroon, 58% of those living with HIV know their status, and just 37% receive 
 treatment. In 2016, 29,000 deaths due to AIDS occurred in both adults and children.


, a traditional practice that is prevalent in Cameroon, may affect girls' health.
 
 (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced among some populations; according to a 2013 UNICEF report,
 1% of women in Cameroon have undergone FGM. Also impacting women and girls' health, the contraceptive prevalence rate is estimated to be just 34.4% in 2014. 
 remain a popular alternative to 
.


 and 
 are integral parts of Cameroonian ceremonies, festivals, social gatherings, and storytelling.
 Traditional dances are highly choreographed and separate men and women or forbid participation by one sex altogether.
 The dances' purposes range from pure entertainment to religious devotion.
 Traditionally, music is transmitted orally. In a typical performance, a chorus of singers echoes a soloist.


Musical accompaniment may be as simple as clapping hands and stamping feet,
 but traditional instruments include bells worn by dancers, clappers, drums and 
, flutes, horns, rattles, scrapers, stringed instruments, whistles, and xylophones; combinations of these vary by ethnic group and region. Some performers sing complete songs alone, accompanied by a harplike instrument.


Popular music styles include 
 of the coast, 
 of the Bassa, 
 of the 
, and 
 of the Bamileke.
 
 has influenced Anglophone Cameroonian performers, and 
's 
 hit "
" is the top-selling African record in history.


The two most popular music styles are 
 and 
. Makossa developed in Douala and mixes folk music, highlife, 
, and 
. Performers such as 
, 
, 
, and 
 popularised the style worldwide in the 1970s and 1980s. Bikutsi originated as war music among the Ewondo. Artists such as 
 developed it into a popular dance music beginning in the 1940s, and performers such as 
 and 
 popularised it internationally during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.


The most notable holiday associated with patriotism in Cameroon is 
, also called Unity Day. Among the most notable religious holidays are 
, and 
, which is typically 39 days after Easter. In the Northwest and Southwest provinces, collectively called 
, October 1 is considered a national holiday, a date Ambazonians consider the day of their independence from Cameroon.


 varies by region, but a large, one-course, evening meal is common throughout the country. A typical dish is based on cocoyams, 
, 
 (manioc), 
, 
, 
, 
, or 
, often pounded into dough-like 
. This is served with a sauce, soup, or stew made from greens, 
, 
, or other ingredients.
 Meat and fish are popular but expensive additions, with chicken often reserved for special occasions.
 Dishes are often quite spicy; seasonings include salt, red pepper sauce, and 
.


Cutlery is common, but food is traditionally manipulated with the right hand. Breakfast consists of leftovers of bread and fruit with 
 or 
. Generally breakfast is made from wheat flour in various different foods such as puff-puff (doughnuts), accra banana made from 
 and flour, bean cakes, and many more. Snacks are popular, especially in larger towns where they may be bought from 
.


Water, 
, and 
 are the traditional mealtime drinks, although beer, soda, and wine have gained popularity. 33 Export beer is the official drink of the 
 and one of the most popular brands, joining Castel, 
, and 
.


Cameroon's relatively large and diverse population is likewise diverse in its fashions. Climate, religious, ethnic and cultural beliefs, and the influences of colonialism, imperialism, and globalization are all factors in contemporary Cameroonian dress.

Notable articles of clothing include: 
, 
 worn by Cameroon women; 
, a traditional hat; kwa, a male handbag; and 
, male custom attire.

Wrappers and 
 are used extensively by both women and men but their use varies by region, with influences from 
 styles more present in the north and 
 and 
 styles more often in the south and west.


 is one of Cameroon's top fashion designers and has received international recognition.


Traditional arts and crafts are practiced throughout the country for commercial, decorative, and religious purposes. Woodcarvings and sculptures are especially common.
 The high-quality clay of the western highlands is used for pottery and ceramics.
 Other crafts include 
, 
, brass and bronze working, 
 carving and painting, 
, and 
 working. Traditional housing styles use local materials and vary from temporary wood-and-leaf shelters of nomadic 
 to the rectangular mud-and-thatch homes of southern peoples. Dwellings of materials such as cement and tin are increasingly common.
 
 is mainly promoted by independent cultural organizations (
, 
) and 
 (
, 
, 
).


Cameroonian literature has concentrated on both European and African themes. Colonial-era writers such as 
 and 
 were educated by European missionary societies and advocated 
 into European culture to bring Cameroon into the modern world.
 After 
, writers such as 
 and 
 analysed and criticised colonialism and rejected assimilation.


Shortly after independence, filmmakers such as 
 and 
 explored similar themes.
 In the 1960s, 
, 
 and other writers explored postcolonialism, problems of African development, and the recovery of African identity.
 In the mid-1970s, filmmakers such as 
 and 
 dealt with the conflicts between traditional and postcolonial society. Literature and films during the next two decades focused more on wholly Cameroonian themes.


National policy strongly advocates sport in all forms. Traditional sports include canoe racing and wrestling, and several hundred runners participate in the 40 km (25 mi) 
 each year.
 Cameroon is one of the few tropical countries to have 
 in the 
.

Sport in Cameroon is dominated by football. Amateur football clubs abound, organised along ethnic lines or under corporate sponsors. The 
 has been one of the most successful in Africa since its strong showing in the 
 and 
. Cameroon has won five 
 titles and the gold medal at the 
.


Cameroon was the host country of the 
 in November–December 2016,
 the 
 and the 
. The 
 is known as the "Indomitable Lionesses", and like their men's counterparts, are also successful at international stage, although it has not won any major trophy.

Cricket has also entered into Cameroon as an emerging sport with the Cameroon Cricket Federation participating in international matches 


Cameroon has produced multiple 
 players including 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
.


The current 
 
 hails from Cameroon.


Ready to make 2023 your year? Start a new chapter with better English skills. Get 30% off our live online, courses now!
Learn English online and improve your skills through our high-quality courses and resources – all designed for adult language learners. Everything you find here has been specially created by the British Council, the world's English teaching experts.
Discover your English level by taking our free online English test
A new year is always a good time to plan and make new goals. Listen to the LearnEnglish team talking about their new-year plans, do a vocabulary quiz and read some advice on how best to plan your learning. Join us and put your English into practice! We're really excited to hear about your plans for 2023!
Were you born in the year of the Dog, the Monkey or maybe the Rooster? Read on to find out more about Lunar New Year and how it is celebrated in some places in Asia.
Explore our site to improve your English with our bite-sized lessons, quizzes and games. With our varied selection of learning materials, you can practise your English for free.
Improve your English speaking, listening, reading and writing
Practise verb tenses and grammar rules
Learn new words to understand and express yourself clearly

The United Kingdom's international organisation for cultural relations and educational opportunities.

A registered charity: 209131 (England and Wales) SC037733 (Scotland).




And also, if you’re studying sentences, you probably would like advice on how to write a book. 
In which case you should definitely read my post 
As an editor, I’ve helped hundreds of writers start and finish their stories, so please learn from all that experience.
If you’re writing a novel, you need guidance (LOTS of it).
Well, here’s the good news: I can teach you 
.
Because I’ve taught thousands of other writers.
Click that link and get help with characters, plot, pacing, theme, and more.
 
 
 
 
 




Excellently written and presented, this is a must have for everyone who loves literature.
Every writer NEEDS this book.
It’s a guide to writing the pivotal moments of your novel.
Whether writing your book or revising it, this will be the most helpful book you’ll ever buy.
Learn how to:
I create online courses for writers to help them write better fiction. 
Using my background as an editor, I’ve written almost 1,000 posts, which more than 3 million authors read annually.
Check out my nonfiction book for writers, “
” and my short story collection – “I Will Shout Your Name.”
I create online courses for writers to help them write better fiction. 
Using my background as an editor, I’ve written almost 1,000 posts, which more than 3 million authors read annually.
Check out my nonfiction book for writers, “
” and my short story collection – “I Will Shout Your Name.”
John Fox helped me enhance the things that were already good and showed me how to shore up my weaknesses. He is particularly good at structure, pacing and the development of characters. If you want someone who understands quality, then John is your man!
– Susan LaDue, author of “Tropical Temptation”
One of the best courses I’ve ever taken, on any topic. Specific, concrete information and examples. This course will save you hours of researching various aspects of book marketing, such as book cover design, obtaining reviews, timing of steps, etc. The return on investment of taking this course is huge.
– Jim Roberts
His presentation of the material was fun and easy to understand, and dramatically improved my writing. The lectures are short, he reads examples from authors and provides PDF handouts. I learned more in this course than reading numerous books and paying three times the money for another course.
– Kay A. Klotzbach

																				Most people have trouble coming up with cool character names, which is why some kids end up with names like Vagena (true story) or Gaylord (Gaylord Focker is truly the worst name ever). But for fiction writers it’s harder because you have to come up…									

																				Hi, I’m John Fox, and as an editor I’ve helped hundreds of authors write, edit and publish their novels. If you’re planning on writing a novel, you’ve come to the right place. Let me guide you through the process. Now, you’re probably intimidated to write…									

																				I looked at the first paragraphs of more than 1,000 novels to make this list. The first paragraphs below are the ones that shocked, surprised, and delighted me. The paragraphs that made me want to read the rest of the book, the paragraphs so memorable that I…									
Ready to make 2023 your year? Start a new chapter with better English skills. Get 30% off our live online, courses now!
Learn English online and improve your skills through our high-quality courses and resources – all designed for adult language learners. Everything you find here has been specially created by the British Council, the world's English teaching experts.
Discover your English level by taking our free online English test
A new year is always a good time to plan and make new goals. Listen to the LearnEnglish team talking about their new-year plans, do a vocabulary quiz and read some advice on how best to plan your learning. Join us and put your English into practice! We're really excited to hear about your plans for 2023!
Were you born in the year of the Dog, the Monkey or maybe the Rooster? Read on to find out more about Lunar New Year and how it is celebrated in some places in Asia.
Explore our site to improve your English with our bite-sized lessons, quizzes and games. With our varied selection of learning materials, you can practise your English for free.
Improve your English speaking, listening, reading and writing
Practise verb tenses and grammar rules
Learn new words to understand and express yourself clearly

The United Kingdom's international organisation for cultural relations and educational opportunities.

A registered charity: 209131 (England and Wales) SC037733 (Scotland).
