
"I don't know anything about that. She is certainly very clever."

"Well," said Beaumont, "I should have supposed you would have found that
sort of thing awfully slow."

"In point of fact," Lord Lambeth rejoined, "I find it uncommonly
lively."

After this, Percy Beaumont held his tongue; but on the 10th of August
he wrote to the Duchess of Bayswater. He was, as I have said, a man of
conscience, and he had a strong, incorruptible sense of the proprieties
of life. His kinsman, meanwhile, was having a great deal of talk with
Bessie Alden--on the red sea rocks beyond the lawn; in the course of
long island rides, with a slow return in the glowing twilight; on the
deep veranda late in the evening. Lord Lambeth, who had stayed at many
houses, had never stayed at a house in which it was possible for a young
man to converse so frequently with a young lady. This young lady
no longer applied to Percy Beaumont for information concerning his
lordship. She addressed herself directly to the young nobleman. She
asked him a great many questions, some of which bored him a little; for
he took no pleasure in talking about himself.

"Lord Lambeth," said Bessie Alden, "are you a hereditary legislator?"

"Oh, I say!" cried Lord Lambeth, "don't make me call myself such names
as that."

"But you are a member of Parliament," said the young girl.

"I don't like the sound of that, either."

"Don't you sit in the House of Lords?" Bessie Alden went on.

"Very seldom," said Lord Lambeth.

"Is it an important position?" she asked.

"Oh, dear, no," said Lord Lambeth.

"I should think it would be very grand," said Bessie Alden, "to possess,
simply by an accident of birth, the right to make laws for a great
nation."

"Ah, but one doesn't make laws. It's a great humbug."

"I don't believe that," the young girl declared. "It must be a great
privilege, and I should think that if one thought of it in the right
way--from a high point of view--it would be very inspiring."

"The less one thinks of it, the better," Lord Lambeth affirmed.

"I think it's tremendous," said Bessie Alden; and on another occasion
she asked him if he had any tenantry. Hereupon it was that, as I have
said, he was a little bored.

"Do you want to buy up their leases?" he asked.

"Well, have you got any livings?" she demanded.

"Oh, I say!" he cried. "Have you got a clergyman that is looking out?"
But she made him tell her that he had a castle; he confessed to but one.
It was the place in which he had been born and brought up, and, as he
had an old-time liking for it, he was beguiled into describing it a
little and saying it was really very jolly. Bessie Alden listened with
great interest and declared that she would give the world to see such
a place. Whereupon--"It would be awfully kind of you to come and
stay there," said Lord Lambeth. He took a vague satisfaction in the
circumstance that Percy Beaumont had not heard him make the remark I
have just recorded.

Mr. Westgate all this time had not, as they said at Newport, "come on."
His wife more than once announced that she expected him on the morrow;
but on the morrow she wandered about a little, with a telegram in
her jeweled fingers, declaring it was very tiresome that his business
detained him in New York; that he could only hope the Englishmen were
having a good time. "I must say," said Mrs. Westgate, "that it is
no thanks to him if you are." And she went on to explain, while she
continued that slow-paced promenade which enabled her well-adjusted
skirts to display themselves so advantageously, that unfortunately in
America there was no leisure class. It was Lord Lambeth's theory, freely
propounded when the young men were together, that Percy Beaumont was
having a very good time with Mrs. Westgate, and that, under the pretext
of meeting for the purpose of animated discussion, they were indulging
in practices that imparted a shade of hypocrisy to the lady's regret for
her husband's absence.

"I assure you we are always discussing and differing," said Percy
Beaumont. "She is awfully argumentative. American ladies certainly don't
mind contradicting you. Upon my word I don't think I was ever treated so
by a woman before. She's so devilish positive."

Mrs. Westgate's positive quality, however, evidently had its
attractions, for Beaumont was constantly at his hostess's side. He
detached himself one day to the extent of going to New York to talk
over the Tennessee Central with Mr. Westgate; but he was absent only
forty-eight hours, during which, with Mr. Westgate's assistance, he
completely settled this piece of business. "They certainly do things
quickly in New York," he observed to his cousin; and he added that
Mr. Westgate had seemed very uneasy lest his wife should miss her
visitor--he had been in such an awful hurry to send him back to her.
"I'm afraid you'll never come up to an American husband, if that's what
the wives expect," he said to Lord Lambeth.

Mrs. Westgate, however, was not to enjoy much longer the entertainment
with which an indulgent husband had desired to keep her provided. On
the 21st of August Lord Lambeth received a telegram from his mother,
requesting him to return immediately to England; his father had been
taken ill, and it was his filial duty to come to him.

The young Englishman was visibly annoyed. "What the deuce does it mean?"
he asked of his kinsman. "What am I to do?"

Percy Beaumont was annoyed as well; he had deemed it his duty, as I have
narrated, to write to the duchess, but he had not expected that this
distinguished woman would act so promptly upon his hint. "It means,"
he said, "that your father is laid up. I don't suppose it's anything
serious; but you have no option. Take the first steamer; but don't be
alarmed."

Lord Lambeth made his farewells; but the few last words that he
exchanged with Bessie Alden are the only ones that have a place in our
record. "Of course I needn't assure you," he said, "that if you should
come to England next year, I expect to be the first person that you
inform of it."

Bessie Alden looked at him a little, and she smiled. "Oh, if we come to
London," she answered, "I should think you would hear of it."

Percy Beaumont returned with his cousin, and his sense of duty compelled
him, one windless afternoon, in mid-Atlantic, to say to Lord Lambeth
that he suspected that the duchess's telegram was in part the result
of something he himself had written to her. "I wrote to her--as I
explicitly notified you I had promised to do--that you were extremely
interested in a little American girl."

Lord Lambeth was extremely angry, and he indulged for some moments
in the simple language of indignation. But I have said that he was a
reasonable young man, and I can give no better proof of it than the fact
that he remarked to his companion at the end of half an hour, "You were
quite right, after all. I am very much interested in her. Only, to
be fair," he added, "you should have told my mother also that she is
not--seriously--interested in me."

Percy Beaumont gave a little laugh. "There is nothing so charming as
modesty in a young man in your position. That speech is a capital proof
that you are sweet on her."

"She is not interested--she is not!" Lord Lambeth repeated.

"My dear fellow," said his companion, "you are very far gone."





PART II


In point of fact, as Percy Beaumont would have said, Mrs. Westgate
disembarked on the 18th of May on the British coast. She was accompanied
by her sister, but she was not attended by any other member of her
family. To the deprivation of her husband's society Mrs. Westgate
was, however, habituated; she had made half a dozen journeys to Europe
without him, and she now accounted for his absence, to interrogative
friends on this side of the Atlantic, by allusion to the regrettable
but conspicuous fact that in America there was no leisure class. The
two ladies came up to London and alighted at Jones's Hotel, where Mrs.
Westgate, who had made on former occasions the most agreeable impression
at this establishment, received an obsequious greeting. Bessie Alden
had felt much excited about coming to England; she had expected the
"associations" would be very charming, that it would be an infinite
pleasure to rest her eyes upon the things she had read about in the
poets and historians. She was very fond of the poets and historians,
of the picturesque, of the past, of retrospect, of mementos and
reverberations of greatness; so that on coming into the English world,
where strangeness and familiarity would go hand in hand, she
was prepared for a multitude of fresh emotions. They began very
promptly--these tender, fluttering sensations; they began with the sight
of the beautiful English landscape, whose dark richness was quickened
and brightened by the season; with the carpeted fields and flowering
hedgerows, as she looked at them from the window of the train; with the
spires of the rural churches peeping above the rook-haunted treetops;
with the oak-studded parks, the ancient homes, the cloudy light,
the speech, the manners, the thousand differences. Mrs. Westgate's
impressions had, of course, much less novelty and keenness, and she gave
but a wandering attention to her sister's ejaculations and rhapsodies.

"You know my enjoyment of England is not so intellectual as Bessie's,"
she said to several of her friends in the course of her visit to this
country. "And yet if it is not intellectual, I can't say it is physical.
I don't think I can quite say what it is, my enjoyment of England." When
once it was settled that the two ladies should come abroad and should
spend a few weeks in England on their way to the Continent, they of
course exchanged a good many allusions to their London acquaintance.

"It will certainly be much nicer having friends there," Bessie Alden had
said one day as she sat on the sunny deck of the steamer at her sister's
feet on a large blue rug.

"Whom do you mean by friends?" Mrs. Westgate asked.

"All those English gentlemen whom you have known and entertained.
Captain Littledale, for instance. And Lord Lambeth and Mr. Beaumont,"
added Bessie Alden.

"Do you expect them to give us a very grand reception?"

Bessie reflected a moment; she was addicted, as we know, to reflection.
"Well, yes."

"My poor, sweet child," murmured her sister.

"What have I said that is so silly?" asked Bessie.

"You are a little too simple; just a little. It is very becoming, but it
pleases people at your expense."

"I am certainly too simple to understand you," said Bessie.

"Shall I tell you a story?" asked her sister.

"If you would be so good. That is what they do to amuse simple people."

Mrs. Westgate consulted her memory, while her companion sat gazing at
the shining sea. "Did you ever hear of the Duke of Green-Erin?"

"I think not," said Bessie.

"Well, it's no matter," her sister went on.

"It's a proof of my simplicity."

"My story is meant to illustrate that of some other people," said Mrs.
Westgate. "The Duke of Green-Erin is what they call in England a great
swell, and some five years ago he came to America. He spent most of his
time in New York, and in New York he spent his days and his nights at
the Butterworths'. You have heard, at least, of the Butterworths. BIEN.
They did everything in the world for him--they turned themselves inside
out. They gave him a dozen dinner parties and balls and were the means
of his being invited to fifty more. At first he used to come into Mrs.
Butterworth's box at the opera in a tweed traveling suit; but someone
stopped that. At any rate, he had a beautiful time, and they parted the
best friends in the world. Two years elapse, and the Butterworths come
abroad and go to London. The first thing they see in all the papers--in
England those things are in the most prominent place--is that the Duke
of Green-Erin has arrived in town for the Season. They wait a little,
and then Mr. Butterworth--as polite as ever--goes and leaves a card.
They wait a little more; the visit is not returned; they wait three
weeks--silence de mort--the Duke gives no sign. The Butterworths see
a lot of other people, put down the Duke of Green-Erin as a rude,
ungrateful man, and forget all about him. One fine day they go to Ascot
Races, and there they meet him face to face. He stares a moment and
then comes up to Mr. Butterworth, taking something from his
pocketbook--something which proves to be a banknote. 'I'm glad to see
you, Mr. Butterworth,' he says, 'so that I can pay you that ten pounds
I lost to you in New York. I saw the other day you remembered our bet;
here are the ten pounds, Mr. Butterworth. Goodbye, Mr. Butterworth.' And
off he goes, and that's the last they see of the Duke of Green-Erin."

"Is that your story?" asked Bessie Alden.

"Don't you think it's interesting?" her sister replied.

"I don't believe it," said the young girl.

"Ah," cried Mrs. Westgate, "you are not so simple after all! Believe it
or not, as you please; there is no smoke without fire."

"Is that the way," asked Bessie after a moment, "that you expect your
friends to treat you?"

"I defy them to treat me very ill, because I shall not give them the
opportunity. With the best will in the world, in that case they can't be
very offensive."

Bessie Alden was silent a moment. "I don't see what makes you talk that
way," she said. "The English are a great people."

"Exactly; and that is just the way they have grown great--by dropping
you when you have ceased to be useful. People say they are not clever;
but I think they are very clever."

"You know you have liked them--all the Englishmen you have seen," said
Bessie.

"They have liked me," her sister rejoined; "it would be more correct to
say that. And, of course, one likes that."

Bessie Alden resumed for some moments her studies in sea green. "Well,"
she said, "whether they like me or not, I mean to like them. And
happily," she added, "Lord Lambeth does not owe me ten pounds."

During the first few days after their arrival at Jones's Hotel our
charming Americans were much occupied with what they would have called
looking about them. They found occasion to make a large number of
purchases, and their opportunities for conversation were such only as
were offered by the deferential London shopmen. Bessie Alden, even
in driving from the station, took an immense fancy to the British
metropolis, and at the risk of exhibiting her as a young woman of vulgar
tastes it must be recorded that for a considerable period she desired no
higher pleasure than to drive about the crowded streets in a hansom cab.
To her attentive eyes they were full of a strange picturesque life, and
it is at least beneath the dignity of our historic muse to enumerate the
trivial objects and incidents which this simple young lady from Boston
found so entertaining. It may be freely mentioned, however, that
whenever, after a round of visits in Bond Street and Regent Street,
she was about to return with her sister to Jones's Hotel, she made an
earnest request that they should be driven home by way of Westminster
Abbey. She had begun by asking whether it would not be possible to take
the Tower on the way to their lodgings; but it happened that at a more
primitive stage of her culture Mrs. Westgate had paid a visit to this
venerable monument, which she spoke of ever afterward vaguely as a
dreadful disappointment; so that she expressed the liveliest disapproval
of any attempt to combine historical researches with the purchase of
hairbrushes and notepaper. The most she would consent to do in this line
was to spend half an hour at Madame Tussaud's, where she saw several
dusty wax effigies of members of the royal family. She told Bessie that
if she wished to go to the Tower she must get someone else to take her.
Bessie expressed hereupon an earnest disposition to go alone; but upon
this proposal as well Mrs. Westgate sprinkled cold water.

"Remember," she said, "that you are not in your innocent little Boston.
It is not a question of walking up and down Beacon Street." Then she
went on to explain that there were two classes of American girls in
Europe--those that walked about alone and those that did not. "You
happen to belong, my dear," she said to her sister, "to the class that
does not."

"It is only," answered Bessie, laughing, "because you happen to prevent
me." And she devoted much private meditation to this question of
effecting a visit to the Tower of London.

Suddenly it seemed as if the problem might be solved; the two ladies at
Jones's Hotel received a visit from Willie Woodley. Such was the social
appellation of a young American who had sailed from New York a few days
after their own departure, and who, having the privilege of intimacy
with them in that city, had lost no time, on his arrival in London,
in coming to pay them his respects. He had, in fact, gone to see them
directly after going to see his tailor, than which there can be no
greater exhibition of promptitude on the part of a young American who
has just alighted at the Charing Cross Hotel. He was a slim, pale youth,
of the most amiable disposition, famous for the skill with which he led
the "German" in New York. Indeed, by the young ladies who habitually
figured in this Terpsichorean revel he was believed to be "the best
dancer in the world"; it was in these terms that he was always spoken
of, and that his identity was indicated. He was the gentlest, softest
young man it was possible to meet; he was beautifully dressed--"in the
English style"--and he knew an immense deal about London. He had been
at Newport during the previous summer, at the time of our young
Englishmen's visit, and he took extreme pleasure in the society of
Bessie Alden, whom he always addressed as "Miss Bessie." She immediately
arranged with him, in the presence of her sister, that he should conduct
her to the scene of Anne Boleyn's execution.

"You may do as you please," said Mrs. Westgate. "Only--if you desire the
information--it is not the custom here for young ladies to knock about
London with young men."

"Miss Bessie has waltzed with me so often," observed Willie Woodley;
"she can surely go out with me in a hansom."

"I consider waltzing," said Mrs. Westgate, "the most innocent pleasure
of our time."

"It's a compliment to our time!" exclaimed the young man with a little
laugh, in spite of himself.

"I don't see why I should regard what is done here," said Bessie Alden.
"Why should I suffer the restrictions of a society of which I enjoy none
of the privileges?"

"That's very good--very good," murmured Willie Woodley.

"Oh, go to the Tower, and feel the ax, if you like," said Mrs. Westgate.
"I consent to your going with Mr. Woodley; but I should not let you go
with an Englishman."

"Miss Bessie wouldn't care to go with an Englishman!" Mr. Woodley
declared with a faint asperity that was, perhaps, not unnatural in a
young man, who, dressing in the manner that I have indicated and knowing
a great deal, as I have said, about London, saw no reason for drawing
these sharp distinctions. He agreed upon a day with Miss Bessie--a day
of that same week.

An ingenious mind might, perhaps, trace a connection between the young
girl's allusion to her destitution of social privileges and a question
she asked on the morrow as she sat with her sister at lunch.

"Don't you mean to write to--to anyone?" said Bessie.

"I wrote this morning to Captain Littledale," Mrs. Westgate replied.

"But Mr. Woodley said that Captain Littledale had gone to India."

"He said he thought he had heard so; he knew nothing about it."

For a moment Bessie Alden said nothing more; then, at last, "And don't
you intend to write to--to Mr. Beaumont?" she inquired.

"You mean to Lord Lambeth," said her sister.

"I said Mr. Beaumont because he was so good a friend of yours."

Mrs. Westgate looked at the young girl with sisterly candor. "I don't
care two straws for Mr. Beaumont."

"You were certainly very nice to him."

"I am nice to everyone," said Mrs. Westgate simply.

"To everyone but me," rejoined Bessie, smiling.

Her sister continued to look at her; then, at last, "Are you in love
with Lord Lambeth?" she asked.

The young girl stared a moment, and the question was apparently too
humorous even to make her blush. "Not that I know of," she answered.

"Because if you are," Mrs. Westgate went on, "I shall certainly not send
for him."

"That proves what I said," declared Bessie, smiling--"that you are not
nice to me."

"It would be a poor service, my dear child," said her sister.

"In what sense? There is nothing against Lord Lambeth that I know of."

Mrs. Westgate was silent a moment. "You ARE in love with him then?"

Bessie stared again; but this time she blushed a little. "Ah! if you
won't be serious," she answered, "we will not mention him again."

For some moments Lord Lambeth was not mentioned again, and it was Mrs.
Westgate who, at the end of this period, reverted to him. "Of course I
will let him know we are here, because I think he would be hurt--justly
enough--if we should go away without seeing him. It is fair to give
him a chance to come and thank me for the kindness we showed him. But I
don't want to seem eager."

"Neither do I," said Bessie with a little laugh.

"Though I confess," added her sister, "that I am curious to see how he
will behave."

"He behaved very well at Newport."

"Newport is not London. At Newport he could do as he liked; but here it
is another affair. He has to have an eye to consequences."

"If he had more freedom, then, at Newport," argued Bessie, "it is the
more to his credit that he behaved well; and if he has to be so careful
here, it is possible he will behave even better."

"Better--better," repeated her sister. "My dear child, what is your
point of view?"

"How do you mean--my point of view?"

"Don't you care for Lord Lambeth--a little?"

This time Bessie Alden was displeased; she slowly got up from the
table, turning her face away from her sister. "You will oblige me by not
talking so," she said.

Mrs. Westgate sat watching her for some moments as she moved slowly
about the room and went and stood at the window. "I will write to him
this afternoon," she said at last.

"Do as you please!" Bessie answered; and presently she turned round. "I
am not afraid to say that I like Lord Lambeth. I like him very much."

"He is not clever," Mrs. Westgate declared.

"Well, there have been clever people whom I have disliked," said Bessie
Alden; "so that I suppose I may like a stupid one. Besides, Lord Lambeth
is not stupid."

"Not so stupid as he looks!" exclaimed her sister, smiling.

"If I were in love with Lord Lambeth, as you said just now, it would be
bad policy on your part to abuse him."

"My dear child, don't give me lessons in policy!" cried Mrs. Westgate.
"The policy I mean to follow is very deep."

The young girl began to walk about the room again; then she stopped
before her sister. "I have never heard in the course of five minutes,"
she said, "so many hints and innuendoes. I wish you would tell me in
plain English what you mean."

"I mean that you may be much annoyed."

"That is still only a hint," said Bessie.

Her sister looked at her, hesitating an instant. "It will be said of you
that you have come after Lord Lambeth--that you followed him."

Bessie Alden threw back her pretty head like a startled hind, and a look
flashed into her face that made Mrs. Westgate rise from her chair. "Who
says such things as that?" she demanded.

"People here."

"I don't believe it," said Bessie.

"You have a very convenient faculty of doubt. But my policy will be, as
I say, very deep. I shall leave you to find out this kind of thing for
yourself."

Bessie fixed her eyes upon her sister, and Mrs. Westgate thought for
a moment there were tears in them. "Do they talk that way here?" she
asked.

"You will see. I shall leave you alone."

"Don't leave me alone," said Bessie Alden. "Take me away."

"No; I want to see what you make of it," her sister continued.

"I don't understand."

"You will understand after Lord Lambeth has come," said Mrs. Westgate
with a little laugh.

The two ladies had arranged that on this afternoon Willie Woodley should
go with them to Hyde Park, where Bessie Alden expected to derive much
entertainment from sitting on a little green chair, under the great
trees, beside Rotten Row. The want of a suitable escort had hitherto
rendered this pleasure inaccessible; but no escort now, for such an
expedition, could have been more suitable than their devoted young
countryman, whose mission in life, it might almost be said, was to find
chairs for ladies, and who appeared on the stroke of half-past five with
a white camellia in his buttonhole.

"I have written to Lord Lambeth, my dear," said Mrs. Westgate to her
sister, on coming into the room where Bessie Alden, drawing on her long
gray gloves, was entertaining their visitor.

Bessie said nothing, but Willie Woodley exclaimed that his lordship was
in town; he had seen his name in the Morning Post.

"Do you read the Morning Post?" asked Mrs. Westgate.

"Oh, yes; it's great fun," Willie Woodley affirmed.

"I want so to see it," said Bessie; "there is so much about it in
Thackeray."

"I will send it to you every morning," said Willie Woodley.

He found them what Bessie Alden thought excellent places, under the
great trees, beside the famous avenue whose humors had been made
familiar to the young girl's childhood by the pictures in Punch. The
day was bright and warm, and the crowd of riders and spectators, and the
great procession of carriages, were proportionately dense and brilliant.
The scene bore the stamp of the London Season at its height, and Bessie
Alden found more entertainment in it than she was able to express to
her companions. She sat silent, under her parasol, and her imagination,
according to its wont, let itself loose into the great changing
assemblage of striking and suggestive figures. They stirred up a host
of old impressions and preconceptions, and she found herself fitting a
history to this person and a theory to that, and making a place for them
all in her little private museum of types. But if she said little, her
sister on one side and Willie Woodley on the other expressed themselves
in lively alternation.

"Look at that green dress with blue flounces," said Mrs. Westgate.
"Quelle toilette!"

"That's the Marquis of Blackborough," said the young man--"the one in
the white coat. I heard him speak the other night in the House of Lords;
it was something about ramrods; he called them 'wamwods.' He's an awful
swell."

"Did you ever see anything like the way they are pinned back?" Mrs.
Westgate resumed. "They never know where to stop."

"They do nothing but stop," said Willie Woodley. "It prevents them from
walking. Here comes a great celebrity--Lady Beatrice Bellevue. She's
awfully fast; see what little steps she takes."

"Well, my dear," Mrs. Westgate pursued, "I hope you are getting some
ideas for your couturiere?"

"I am getting plenty of ideas," said Bessie, "but I don't know that my
couturiere would appreciate them."

Willie Woodley presently perceived a friend on horseback, who drove up
beside the barrier of the Row and beckoned to him. He went forward, and
the crowd of pedestrians closed about him, so that for some ten minutes
he was hidden from sight. At last he reappeared, bringing a gentleman
with him--a gentleman whom Bessie at first supposed to be his friend
dismounted. But at a second glance she found herself looking at Lord
Lambeth, who was shaking hands with her sister.

"I found him over there," said Willie Woodley, "and I told him you were
here."

And then Lord Lambeth, touching his hat a little, shook hands with
Bessie. "Fancy your being here!" he said. He was blushing and smiling;
he looked very handsome, and he had a kind of splendor that he had not
had in America. Bessie Alden's imagination, as we know, was just then in
exercise; so that the tall young Englishman, as he stood there looking
down at her, had the benefit of it. "He is handsomer and more splendid
than anything I have ever seen," she said to herself. And then she
remembered that he was a marquis, and she thought he looked like a
marquis.

"I say, you know," he cried, "you ought to have let a man know you were
here!"

"I wrote to you an hour ago," said Mrs. Westgate.

"Doesn't all the world know it?" asked Bessie, smiling.

"I assure you I didn't know it!" cried Lord Lambeth. "Upon my honor I
hadn't heard of it. Ask Woodley now; had I, Woodley?"

"Well, I think you are rather a humbug," said Willie Woodley.

"You don't believe that--do you, Miss Alden?" asked his lordship. "You
don't believe I'm a humbug, eh?"

"No," said Bessie, "I don't."

"You are too tall to stand up, Lord Lambeth," Mrs. Westgate observed.
"You are only tolerable when you sit down. Be so good as to get a
chair."

He found a chair and placed it sidewise, close to the two ladies. "If I
hadn't met Woodley I should never have found you," he went on. "Should
I, Woodley?"

"Well, I guess not," said the young American.

"Not even with my letter?" asked Mrs. Westgate.

"Ah, well, I haven't got your letter yet; I suppose I shall get it this
evening. It was awfully kind of you to write."

"So I said to Bessie," observed Mrs. Westgate.

"Did she say so, Miss Alden?" Lord Lambeth inquired. "I daresay you have
been here a month."

"We have been here three," said Mrs. Westgate.

"Have you been here three months?" the young man asked again of Bessie.

"It seems a long time," Bessie answered.

"I say, after that you had better not call me a humbug!" cried Lord
Lambeth. "I have only been in town three weeks; but you must have been
hiding away; I haven't seen you anywhere."

"Where should you have seen us--where should we have gone?" asked Mrs.
Westgate.

"You should have gone to Hurlingham," said Willie Woodley.

"No; let Lord Lambeth tell us," Mrs. Westgate insisted.

"There are plenty of places to go to," said Lord Lambeth; "each one
stupider than the other. I mean people's houses; they send you cards."

"No one has sent us cards," said Bessie.

"We are very quiet," her sister declared. "We are here as travelers."

"We have been to Madame Tussaud's," Bessie pursued.

"Oh, I say!" cried Lord Lambeth.

"We thought we should find your image there," said Mrs. Westgate--"yours
and Mr. Beaumont's."

"In the Chamber of Horrors?" laughed the young man.

"It did duty very well for a party," said Mrs. Westgate. "All the women
were decolletes, and many of the figures looked as if they could speak
if they tried."

"Upon my word," Lord Lambeth rejoined, "you see people at London parties
that look as if they couldn't speak if they tried."

"Do you think Mr. Woodley could find us Mr. Beaumont?" asked Mrs.
Westgate.

Lord Lambeth stared and looked round him. "I daresay he could. Beaumont
often comes here. Don't you think you could find him, Woodley? Make a
dive into the crowd."

"Thank you; I have had enough diving," said Willie Woodley. "I will wait
till Mr. Beaumont comes to the surface."

"I will bring him to see you," said Lord Lambeth; "where are you
staying?"

"You will find the address in my letter--Jones's Hotel."

"Oh, one of those places just out of Piccadilly? Beastly hole, isn't
it?" Lord Lambeth inquired.

"I believe it's the best hotel in London," said Mrs. Westgate.

"But they give you awful rubbish to eat, don't they?" his lordship went
on.

"Yes," said Mrs. Westgate.

"I always feel so sorry for the people that come up to town and go to
live in those places," continued the young man. "They eat nothing but
filth."

"Oh, I say!" cried Willie Woodley.

"Well, how do you like London, Miss Alden?" Lord Lambeth asked,
unperturbed by this ejaculation.

"I think it's grand," said Bessie Alden.

"My sister likes it, in spite of the 'filth'!" Mrs. Westgate exclaimed.

"I hope you are going to stay a long time."

"As long as I can," said Bessie.

"And where is Mr. Westgate?" asked Lord Lambeth of this gentleman's
wife.

"He's where he always is--in that tiresome New York."

"He must be tremendously clever," said the young man.

"I suppose he is," said Mrs. Westgate.

Lord Lambeth sat for nearly an hour with his American friends; but it
is not our purpose to relate their conversation in full. He addressed
a great many remarks to Bessie Alden, and finally turned toward her
altogether, while Willie Woodley entertained Mrs. Westgate. Bessie
herself said very little; she was on her guard, thinking of what
her sister had said to her at lunch. Little by little, however, she
interested herself in Lord Lambeth again, as she had done at Newport;
only it seemed to her that here he might become more interesting. He
would be an unconscious part of the antiquity, the impressiveness, the
picturesqueness, of England; and poor Bessie Alden, like many a Yankee
maiden, was terribly at the mercy of picturesqueness.

"I have often wished I were at Newport again," said the young man.
"Those days I spent at your sister's were awfully jolly."

"We enjoyed them very much; I hope your father is better."

"Oh, dear, yes. When I got to England, he was out grouse shooting.
It was what you call in America a gigantic fraud. My mother had got
nervous. My three weeks at Newport seemed like a happy dream."

"America certainly is very different from England," said Bessie.

"I hope you like England better, eh?" Lord Lambeth rejoined almost
persuasively.

"No Englishman can ask that seriously of a person of another country."

Her companion looked at her for a moment. "You mean it's a matter of
course?"

"If I were English," said Bessie, "it would certainly seem to me a
matter of course that everyone should be a good patriot."

"Oh, dear, yes, patriotism is everything," said Lord Lambeth, not quite
following, but very contented. "Now, what are you going to do here?"

"On Thursday I am going to the Tower."

"The Tower?"

"The Tower of London. Did you never hear of it?"

"Oh, yes, I have been there," said Lord Lambeth. "I was taken there
by my governess when I was six years old. It's a rum idea, your going
there."

"Do give me a few more rum ideas," said Bessie. "I want to see
everything of that sort. I am going to Hampton Court, and to Windsor,
and to the Dulwich Gallery."

Lord Lambeth seemed greatly amused. "I wonder you don't go to the
Rosherville Gardens."

"Are they interesting?" asked Bessie.

"Oh, wonderful."

"Are they very old? That's all I care for," said Bessie.

"They are tremendously old; they are all falling to ruins."

"I think there is nothing so charming as an old ruinous garden," said
the young girl. "We must certainly go there."

Lord Lambeth broke out into merriment. "I say, Woodley," he cried,
"here's Miss Alden wants to go to the Rosherville Gardens!"

Willie Woodley looked a little blank; he was caught in the fact of
ignorance of an apparently conspicuous feature of London life. But in
a moment he turned it off. "Very well," he said, "I'll write for a
permit."

Lord Lambeth's exhilaration increased. "Gad, I believe you Americans
would go anywhere!" he cried.

"We wish to go to Parliament," said Bessie. "That's one of the first
things."

"Oh, it would bore you to death!" cried the young man.

"We wish to hear you speak."

"I never speak--except to young ladies," said Lord Lambeth, smiling.

Bessie Alden looked at him a while, smiling, too, in the shadow of her
parasol. "You are very strange," she murmured. "I don't think I approve
of you."

"Ah, now, don't be severe, Miss Alden," said Lord Lambeth, smiling still
more. "Please don't be severe. I want you to like me--awfully."

"To like you awfully? You must not laugh at me, then, when I make
mistakes. I consider it my right--as a freeborn American--to make as
many mistakes as I choose."

"Upon my word, I didn't laugh at you," said Lord Lambeth.

"And not only that," Bessie went on; "but I hold that all my mistakes
shall be set down to my credit. You must think the better of me for
them."

"I can't think better of you than I do," the young man declared.

Bessie Alden looked at him a moment again. "You certainly speak very
well to young ladies. But why don't you address the House?--isn't that
what they call it?"

"Because I have nothing to say," said Lord Lambeth.

"Haven't you a great position?" asked Bessie Alden.

He looked a moment at the back of his glove. "I'll set that down," he
said, "as one of your mistakes--to your credit." And as if he disliked
talking about his position, he changed the subject. "I wish you would
let me go with you to the Tower, and to Hampton Court, and to all those
other places."

"We shall be most happy," said Bessie.

"And of course I shall be delighted to show you the House of Lords--some
day that suits you. There are a lot of things I want to do for you.
I want to make you have a good time. And I should like very much to
present some of my friends to you, if it wouldn't bore you. Then it
would be awfully kind of you to come down to Branches."

"We are much obliged to you, Lord Lambeth," said Bessie. "What is
Branches?"

"It's a house in the country. I think you might like it."

Willie Woodley and Mrs. Westgate at this moment were sitting in silence,
and the young man's ear caught these last words of Lord Lambeth's.
"He's inviting Miss Bessie to one of his castles," he murmured to his
companion.

Mrs. Westgate, foreseeing what she mentally called "complications,"
immediately got up; and the two ladies, taking leave of Lord Lambeth,
returned, under Mr. Woodley's conduct, to Jones's Hotel.

Lord Lambeth came to see them on the morrow, bringing Percy Beaumont
with him--the latter having instantly declared his intention of
neglecting none of the usual offices of civility. This declaration,
however, when his kinsman informed him of the advent of their American
friends, had been preceded by another remark.

"Here they are, then, and you are in for it."

"What am I in for?" demanded Lord Lambeth.

"I will let your mother give it a name. With all respect to whom," added
Percy Beaumont, "I must decline on this occasion to do any more police
duty. Her Grace must look after you herself."

"I will give her a chance," said her Grace's son, a trifle grimly. "I
shall make her go and see them."

"She won't do it, my boy."

"We'll see if she doesn't," said Lord Lambeth.

But if Percy Beaumont took a somber view of the arrival of the two
ladies at Jones's Hotel, he was sufficiently a man of the world to
offer them a smiling countenance. He fell into animated
conversation--conversation, at least, that was animated on her
side--with Mrs. Westgate, while his companion made himself agreeable
to the younger lady. Mrs. Westgate began confessing and protesting,
declaring and expounding.

"I must say London is a great deal brighter and prettier just now
than it was when I was here last--in the month of November. There
is evidently a great deal going on, and you seem to have a good many
flowers. I have no doubt it is very charming for all you people, and
that you amuse yourselves immensely. It is very good of you to let
Bessie and me come and sit and look at you. I suppose you will think I
am very satirical, but I must confess that that's the feeling I have in
London."

"I am afraid I don't quite understand to what feeling you allude," said
Percy Beaumont.

"The feeling that it's all very well for you English people. Everything
is beautifully arranged for you."

"It seems to me it is very well for some Americans, sometimes," rejoined
Beaumont.

"For some of them, yes--if they like to be patronized. But I must say I
don't like to be patronized. I may be very eccentric, and undisciplined,
and outrageous, but I confess I never was fond of patronage. I like
to associate with people on the same terms as I do in my own country;
that's a peculiar taste that I have. But here people seem to expect
something else--Heaven knows what! I am afraid you will think I am very
ungrateful, for I certainly have received a great deal of attention. The
last time I was here, a lady sent me a message that I was at liberty to
come and see her."

"Dear me! I hope you didn't go," observed Percy Beaumont.

"You are deliciously naive, I must say that for you!" Mrs. Westgate
exclaimed. "It must be a great advantage to you here in London. I
suppose that if I myself had a little more naivete, I should enjoy it
more. I should be content to sit on a chair in the park, and see the
people pass, and be told that this is the Duchess of Suffolk, and that
is the Lord Chamberlain, and that I must be thankful for the privilege
of beholding them. I daresay it is very wicked and critical of me to ask
for anything else. But I was always critical, and I freely confess to
the sin of being fastidious. I am told there is some remarkably superior
second-rate society provided here for strangers. MERCI! I don't want
any superior second-rate society. I want the society that I have been
accustomed to."

"I hope you don't call Lambeth and me second rate," Beaumont interposed.

"Oh, I am accustomed to you," said Mrs. Westgate. "Do you know that you
English sometimes make the most wonderful speeches? The first time I
came to London I went out to dine--as I told you, I have received a
great deal of attention. After dinner, in the drawing room, I had some
conversation with an old lady; I assure you I had. I forget what we
talked about, but she presently said, in allusion to something we were
discussing, 'Oh, you know, the aristocracy do so-and-so; but in one's
own class of life it is very different.' In one's own class of life!
What is a poor unprotected American woman to do in a country where she
is liable to have that sort of thing said to her?"

"You seem to get hold of some very queer old ladies; I compliment you
on your acquaintance!" Percy Beaumont exclaimed. "If you are trying to
bring me to admit that London is an odious place, you'll not succeed.
I'm extremely fond of it, and I think it the jolliest place in the
world."

"POUR VOUS AUTRES. I never said the contrary," Mrs. Westgate retorted.
I make use of this expression, because both interlocutors had begun to
raise their voices. Percy Beaumont naturally did not like to hear his
country abused, and Mrs. Westgate, no less naturally, did not like a
stubborn debater.

"Hallo!" said Lord Lambeth; "what are they up to now?" And he came away
from the window, where he had been standing with Bessie Alden.

"I quite agree with a very clever countrywoman of mine," Mrs. Westgate
continued with charming ardor, though with imperfect relevancy. She
smiled at the two gentlemen for a moment with terrible brightness, as
if to toss at their feet--upon their native heath--the gauntlet of
defiance. "For me, there are only two social positions worth speaking
of--that of an American lady and that of the Emperor of Russia."

"And what do you do with the American gentlemen?" asked Lord Lambeth.

"She leaves them in America!" said Percy Beaumont.

On the departure of their visitors, Bessie Alden told her sister that
Lord Lambeth would come the next day, to go with them to the Tower, and
that he had kindly offered to bring his "trap" and drive them thither.
Mrs. Westgate listened in silence to this communication, and for some
time afterward she said nothing. But at last, "If you had not requested
me the other day not to mention it," she began, "there is something I
should venture to ask you." Bessie frowned a little; her dark blue eyes
were more dark than blue. But her sister went on. "As it is, I will
take the risk. You are not in love with Lord Lambeth: I believe it,
perfectly. Very good. But is there, by chance, any danger of your
becoming so? It's a very simple question; don't take offense. I have a
particular reason," said Mrs. Westgate, "for wanting to know."

Bessie Alden for some moments said nothing; she only looked displeased.
"No; there is no danger," she answered at last, curtly.

"Then I should like to frighten them," declared Mrs. Westgate, clasping
her jeweled hands.

"To frighten whom?"

"All these people; Lord Lambeth's family and friends."

"How should you frighten them?" asked the young girl.

"It wouldn't be I--it would be you. It would frighten them to think that
you should absorb his lordship's young affections."

Bessie Alden, with her clear eyes still overshadowed by her dark brows,
continued to interrogate. "Why should that frighten them?"

Mrs. Westgate poised her answer with a smile before delivering it.
"Because they think you are not good enough. You are a charming girl,
beautiful and amiable, intelligent and clever, and as bien-elevee as it
is possible to be; but you are not a fit match for Lord Lambeth."

Bessie Alden was decidedly disgusted. "Where do you get such
extraordinary ideas?" she asked. "You have said some such strange things
lately. My dear Kitty, where do you collect them?"

Kitty was evidently enamored of her idea. "Yes, it would put them on
pins and needles, and it wouldn't hurt you. Mr. Beaumont is already most
uneasy; I could soon see that."

The young girl meditated a moment. "Do you mean that they spy upon
him--that they interfere with him?"

"I don't know what power they have to interfere, but I know that a
British mama may worry her son's life out."

It has been intimated that, as regards certain disagreeable things,
Bessie Alden had a fund of skepticism. She abstained on the present
occasion from expressing disbelief, for she wished not to irritate her
sister. But she said to herself that Kitty had been misinformed--that
this was a traveler's tale. Though she was a girl of a lively
imagination, there could in the nature of things be, to her sense, no
reality in the idea of her belonging to a vulgar category. What she
said aloud was, "I must say that in that case I am very sorry for Lord
Lambeth."

Mrs. Westgate, more and more exhilarated by her scheme, was smiling at
her again. "If I could only believe it was safe!" she exclaimed. "When
you begin to pity him, I, on my side, am afraid."

"Afraid of what?"

"Of your pitying him too much."

Bessie Alden turned away impatiently; but at the end of a minute she
turned back. "What if I should pity him too much?" she asked.

Mrs. Westgate hereupon turned away, but after a moment's reflection
she also faced her sister again. "It would come, after all, to the same
thing," she said.

Lord Lambeth came the next day with his trap, and the two ladies,
attended by Willie Woodley, placed themselves under his guidance, and
were conveyed eastward, through some of the duskier portions of the
metropolis, to the great turreted donjon which overlooks the London
shipping. They all descended from their vehicle and entered the famous
inclosure; and they secured the services of a venerable beefeater, who,
though there were many other claimants for legendary information, made
a fine exclusive party of them and marched them through courts and
corridors, through armories and prisons. He delivered his usual
peripatetic discourse, and they stopped and stared, and peeped and
stooped, according to the official admonitions. Bessie Alden asked the
old man in the crimson doublet a great many questions; she thought it
a most fascinating place. Lord Lambeth was in high good humor; he was
constantly laughing; he enjoyed what he would have called the lark.
Willie Woodley kept looking at the ceilings and tapping the walls with
the knuckle of a pearl-gray glove; and Mrs. Westgate, asking at frequent
intervals to be allowed to sit down and wait till they came back, was as
frequently informed that they would never come back. To a great many of
Bessie's questions--chiefly on collateral points of English history--the
ancient warder was naturally unable to reply; whereupon she always
appealed to Lord Lambeth. But his lordship was very ignorant. He
declared that he knew nothing about that sort of thing, and he seemed
greatly diverted at being treated as an authority.

"You can't expect everyone to know as much as you," he said.

"I should expect you to know a great deal more," declared Bessie Alden.

"Women always know more than men about names and dates and that sort of
thing," Lord Lambeth rejoined. "There was Lady Jane Grey we have just
been hearing about, who went in for Latin and Greek and all the learning
of her age."

"YOU have no right to be ignorant, at all events," said Bessie.

"Why haven't I as good a right as anyone else?"

"Because you have lived in the midst of all these things."

"What things do you mean? Axes, and blocks, and thumbscrews?"

"All these historical things. You belong to a historical family."

"Bessie is really too historical," said Mrs. Westgate, catching a word
of this dialogue.

"Yes, you are too historical," said Lord Lambeth, laughing, but thankful
for a formula. "Upon my honor, you are too historical!"

He went with the ladies a couple of days later to Hampton Court, Willie
Woodley being also of the party. The afternoon was charming, the famous
horse chestnuts were in blossom, and Lord Lambeth, who quite entered
into the spirit of the cockney excursionist, declared that it was a
jolly old place. Bessie Alden was in ecstasies; she went about murmuring
and exclaiming.

"It's too lovely," said the young girl; "it's too enchanting; it's too
exactly what it ought to be!"

At Hampton Court the little flocks of visitors are not provided with an
official bellwether, but are left to browse at discretion upon the local
antiquities. It happened in this manner that, in default of another
informant, Bessie Alden, who on doubtful questions was able to suggest
a great many alternatives, found herself again applying for intellectual
assistance to Lord Lambeth. But he again assured her that he was utterly
helpless in such matters--that his education had been sadly neglected.

"And I am sorry it makes you unhappy," he added in a moment.

"You are very disappointing, Lord Lambeth," she said.

"Ah, now don't say that," he cried. "That's the worst thing you could
possibly say."

"No," she rejoined, "it is not so bad as to say that I had expected
nothing of you."

"I don't know. Give me a notion of the sort of thing you expected."

"Well," said Bessie Alden, "that you would be more what I should like to
be--what I should try to be--in your place."

"Ah, my place!" exclaimed Lord Lambeth. "You are always talking about my
place!"

The young girl looked at him; he thought she colored a little; and for a
moment she made no rejoinder.

"Does it strike you that I am always talking about your place?" she
asked.

"I am sure you do it a great honor," he said, fearing he had been
uncivil.

"I have often thought about it," she went on after a moment. "I have
often thought about your being a hereditary legislator. A hereditary
legislator ought to know a great many things."

"Not if he doesn't legislate."

"But you do legislate; it's absurd your saying you don't. You are very
much looked up to here--I am assured of that."

"I don't know that I ever noticed it."

"It is because you are used to it, then. You ought to fill the place."

"How do you mean to fill it?" asked Lord Lambeth.

"You ought to be very clever and brilliant, and to know almost
everything."

Lord Lambeth looked at her a moment. "Shall I tell you something?" he
asked. "A young man in my position, as you call it--"

"I didn't invent the term," interposed Bessie Alden. "I have seen it in
a great many books."

"Hang it! you are always at your books. A fellow in my position, then,
does very well whatever he does. That's about what I mean to say."

"Well, if your own people are content with you," said Bessie Alden,
laughing, "it is not for me to complain. But I shall always think that,
properly, you should have been a great mind--a great character."

"Ah, that's very theoretic," Lord Lambeth declared. "Depend upon it,
that's a Yankee prejudice."

"Happy the country," said Bessie Alden, "where even people's prejudices
are so elevated!"

"Well, after all," observed Lord Lambeth, "I don't know that I am such a
fool as you are trying to make me out."

"I said nothing so rude as that; but I must repeat that you are
disappointing."

"My dear Miss Alden," exclaimed the young man, "I am the best fellow in
the world!"

"Ah, if it were not for that!" said Bessie Alden with a smile.

Mrs. Westgate had a good many more friends in London than she pretended,
and before long she had renewed acquaintance with most of them. Their
hospitality was extreme, so that, one thing leading to another, she
began, as the phrase is, to go out. Bessie Alden, in this way, saw
something of what she found it a great satisfaction to call to herself
English society. She went to balls and danced, she went to dinners and
talked, she went to concerts and listened (at concerts Bessie always
listened), she went to exhibitions and wondered. Her enjoyment was
keen and her curiosity insatiable, and, grateful in general for all her
opportunities, she especially prized the privilege of meeting certain
celebrated persons--authors and artists, philosophers and statesmen--of
whose renown she had been a humble and distant beholder, and who now, as
a part of the habitual furniture of London drawing rooms, struck her
as stars fallen from the firmament and become palpable--revealing also
sometimes, on contact, qualities not to have been predicted of sidereal
bodies. Bessie, who knew so many of her contemporaries by reputation,
had a good many personal disappointments; but, on the other hand, she
had innumerable satisfactions and enthusiasms, and she communicated the
emotions of either class to a dear friend, of her own sex, in Boston,
with whom she was in voluminous correspondence. Some of her reflections,
indeed, she attempted to impart to Lord Lambeth, who came almost every
day to Jones's Hotel, and whom Mrs. Westgate admitted to be really
devoted. Captain Littledale, it appeared, had gone to India; and of
several others of Mrs. Westgate's ex-pensioners--gentlemen who, as she
said, had made, in New York, a clubhouse of her drawing room--no tidings
were to be obtained; but Lord Lambeth was certainly attentive enough to
make up for the accidental absences, the short memories, all the other
irregularities of everyone else. He drove them in the park, he took them
to visit private collections of pictures, and, having a house of his
own, invited them to dinner. Mrs. Westgate, following the fashion of
many of her compatriots, caused herself and her sister to be presented
at the English court by her diplomatic representative--for it was
in this manner that she alluded to the American minister to England,
inquiring what on earth he was put there for, if not to make the proper
arrangements for one's going to a Drawing Room.

Lord Lambeth declared that he hated Drawing Rooms, but he participated
in the ceremony on the day on which the two ladies at Jones's Hotel
repaired to Buckingham Palace in a remarkable coach which his lordship
had sent to fetch them. He had on a gorgeous uniform, and Bessie Alden
was particularly struck with his appearance--especially when on her
asking him, rather foolishly as she felt, if he were a loyal subject,
he replied that he was a loyal subject to HER. This declaration was
emphasized by his dancing with her at a royal ball to which the two
ladies afterward went, and was not impaired by the fact that she
thought he danced very ill. He seemed to her wonderfully kind; she asked
herself, with growing vivacity, why he should be so kind. It was his
disposition--that seemed the natural answer. She had told her sister
that she liked him very much, and now that she liked him more she
wondered why. She liked him for his disposition; to this question as
well that seemed the natural answer. When once the impressions of London
life began to crowd thickly upon her, she completely forgot her sister's
warning about the cynicism of public opinion. It had given her great
pain at the moment, but there was no particular reason why she should
remember it; it corresponded too little with any sensible reality; and
it was disagreeable to Bessie to remember disagreeable things. So she
was not haunted with the sense of a vulgar imputation. She was not in
love with Lord Lambeth--she assured herself of that. It will immediately
be observed that when such assurances become necessary the state of a
young lady's affections is already ambiguous; and, indeed, Bessie
Alden made no attempt to dissimulate--to herself, of course--a certain
tenderness that she felt for the young nobleman. She said to herself
that she liked the type to which he belonged--the simple, candid, manly,
healthy English temperament. She spoke to herself of him as women speak
of young men they like--alluded to his bravery (which she had never in
the least seen tested), to his honesty and gentlemanliness, and was not
silent upon the subject of his good looks. She was perfectly conscious,
moreover, that she liked to think of his more adventitious merits; that
her imagination was excited and gratified by the sight of a handsome
young man endowed with such large opportunities--opportunities she
hardly knew for what, but, as she supposed, for doing great things--for
setting an example, for exerting an influence, for conferring happiness,
for encouraging the arts. She had a kind of ideal of conduct for a young
man who should find himself in this magnificent position, and she tried
to adapt it to Lord Lambeth's deportment as you might attempt to fit a
silhouette in cut paper upon a shadow projected upon a wall. But Bessie
Alden's silhouette refused to coincide with his lordship's image,
and this want of harmony sometimes vexed her more than she thought
reasonable. When he was absent it was, of course, less striking; then
he seemed to her a sufficiently graceful combination of high
responsibilities and amiable qualities. But when he sat there
within sight, laughing and talking with his customary good humor and
simplicity, she measured it more accurately, and she felt acutely that
if Lord Lambeth's position was heroic, there was but little of the
hero in the young man himself. Then her imagination wandered away
from him--very far away; for it was an incontestable fact that at such
moments he seemed distinctly dull. I am afraid that while Bessie's
imagination was thus invidiously roaming, she cannot have been herself
a very lively companion; but it may well have been that these occasional
fits of indifference seemed to Lord Lambeth a part of the young girl's
personal charm. It had been a part of this charm from the first that
he felt that she judged him and measured him more freely and
irresponsibly--more at her ease and her leisure, as it were--than
several young ladies with whom he had been on the whole about as
intimate. To feel this, and yet to feel that she also liked him,
was very agreeable to Lord Lambeth. He fancied he had compassed that
gratification so desirable to young men of title and fortune--being
liked for himself. It is true that a cynical counselor might have
whispered to him, "Liked for yourself? Yes; but not so very much!" He
had, at any rate, the constant hope of being liked more.

It may seem, perhaps, a trifle singular--but it is nevertheless
true--that Bessie Alden, when he struck her as dull, devoted some time,
on grounds of conscience, to trying to like him more. I say on grounds
of conscience because she felt that he had been extremely "nice" to her
sister, and because she reflected that it was no more than fair that
she should think as well of him as he thought of her. This effort was
possibly sometimes not so successful as it might have been, for the
result of it was occasionally a vague irritation, which expressed itself
in hostile criticism of several British institutions. Bessie Alden went
to some entertainments at which she met Lord Lambeth; but she went
to others at which his lordship was neither actually nor potentially
present; and it was chiefly on these latter occasions that she
encountered those literary and artistic celebrities of whom mention has
been made. After a while she reduced the matter to a principle. If Lord
Lambeth should appear anywhere, it was a symbol that there would be no
poets and philosophers; and in consequence--for it was almost a strict
consequence--she used to enumerate to the young man these objects of her
admiration.

"You seem to be awfully fond of those sort of people," said Lord Lambeth
one day, as if the idea had just occurred to him.

"They are the people in England I am most curious to see," Bessie Alden
replied.

"I suppose that's because you have read so much," said Lord Lambeth
gallantly.

"I have not read so much. It is because we think so much of them at
home."

"Oh, I see," observed the young nobleman. "In Boston."

"Not only in Boston; everywhere," said Bessie. "We hold them in great
honor; they go to the best dinner parties."

"I daresay you are right. I can't say I know many of them."

"It's a pity you don't," Bessie Alden declared. "It would do you good."

"I daresay it would," said Lord Lambeth very humbly. "But I must say I
don't like the looks of some of them."

"Neither do I--of some of them. But there are all kinds, and many of
them are charming."

"I have talked with two or three of them," the young man went on, "and I
thought they had a kind of fawning manner."

"Why should they fawn?" Bessie Alden demanded.

"I'm sure I don't know. Why, indeed?"

"Perhaps you only thought so," said Bessie.

"Well, of course," rejoined her companion, "that's a kind of thing that
can't be proved."

"In America they don't fawn," said Bessie.

"Ah, well, then, they must be better company."

Bessie was silent a moment. "That is one of the things I don't like
about England," she said; "your keeping the distinguished people apart."

"How do you mean apart?"

"Why, letting them come only to certain places. You never see them."

Lord Lambeth looked at her a moment. "What people do you mean?"

"The eminent people--the authors and artists--the clever people."

"Oh, there are other eminent people besides those," said Lord Lambeth.

"Well, you certainly keep them apart," repeated the young girl.

"And there are other clever people," added Lord Lambeth simply.

Bessie Alden looked at him, and she gave a light laugh. "Not many," she
said.

On another occasion--just after a dinner party--she told him that there
was something else in England she did not like.

"Oh, I say!" he cried, "haven't you abused us enough?"

"I have never abused you at all," said Bessie; "but I don't like your
PRECEDENCE."

"It isn't my precedence!" Lord Lambeth declared, laughing.

"Yes, it is yours--just exactly yours; and I think it's odious," said
Bessie.

"I never saw such a young lady for discussing things! Has someone had
the impudence to go before you?" asked his lordship.

"It is not the going before me that I object to," said Bessie; "it
is their thinking that they have a right to do it--A RIGHT THAT I
RECOGNIZE."

"I never saw such a young lady as you are for not 'recognizing.' I have
no doubt the thing is BEASTLY, but it saves a lot of trouble."

"It makes a lot of trouble. It's horrid," said Bessie.

"But how would you have the first people go?" asked Lord Lambeth. "They
can't go last."

"Whom do you mean by the first people?"

"Ah, if you mean to question first principles!" said Lord Lambeth.

"If those are your first principles, no wonder some of your arrangements
are horrid," observed Bessie Alden with a very pretty ferocity. "I am a
young girl, so of course I go last; but imagine what Kitty must feel on
being informed that she is not at liberty to budge until certain other
ladies have passed out."

"Oh, I say, she is not 'informed!'" cried Lord Lambeth. "No one would do
such a thing as that."

"She is made to feel it," the young girl insisted--"as if they were
afraid she would make a rush for the door. No; you have a lovely
country," said Bessie Alden, "but your precedence is horrid."

"I certainly shouldn't think your sister would like it," rejoined Lord
Lambeth with even exaggerated gravity. But Bessie Alden could induce
him to enter no formal protest against this repulsive custom, which he
seemed to think an extreme convenience.

Percy Beaumont all this time had been a very much less frequent visitor
at Jones's Hotel than his noble kinsman; he had, in fact, called but
twice upon the two American ladies. Lord Lambeth, who often saw him,
reproached him with his neglect and declared that, although Mrs.
Westgate had said nothing about it, he was sure that she was secretly
wounded by it. "She suffers too much to speak," said Lord Lambeth.

"That's all gammon," said Percy Beaumont; "there's a limit to what
people can suffer!" And, though sending no apologies to Jones's Hotel,
he undertook in a manner to explain his absence. "You are always there,"
he said, "and that's reason enough for my not going."

"I don't see why. There is enough for both of us."

"I don't care to be a witness of your--your reckless passion," said
Percy Beaumont.

Lord Lambeth looked at him with a cold eye and for a moment said
nothing. "It's not so obvious as you might suppose," he rejoined dryly,
"considering what a demonstrative beggar I am."

"I don't want to know anything about it--nothing whatever," said
Beaumont. "Your mother asks me everytime she sees me whether I believe
you are really lost--and Lady Pimlico does the same. I prefer to be able
to answer that I know nothing about it--that I never go there. I stay
away for consistency's sake. As I said the other day, they must look
after you themselves."

"You are devilish considerate," said Lord Lambeth. "They never question
me."

"They are afraid of you. They are afraid of irritating you and making
you worse. So they go to work very cautiously, and, somewhere or other,
they get their information. They know a great deal about you. They
know that you have been with those ladies to the dome of St. Paul's
and--where was the other place?--to the Thames Tunnel."

"If all their knowledge is as accurate as that, it must be very
valuable," said Lord Lambeth.

"Well, at any rate, they know that you have been visiting the 'sights
of the metropolis.' They think--very naturally, as it seems to me--that
when you take to visiting the sights of the metropolis with a little
American girl, there is serious cause for alarm." Lord Lambeth responded
to this intimation by scornful laughter, and his companion continued,
after a pause: "I said just now I didn't want to know anything about
the affair; but I will confess that I am curious to learn whether you
propose to marry Miss Bessie Alden."

On this point Lord Lambeth gave his interlocutor no immediate
satisfaction; he was musing, with a frown. "By Jove," he said, "they go
rather too far. They SHALL find me dangerous--I promise them."

Percy Beaumont began to laugh. "You don't redeem your promises. You said
the other day you would make your mother call."

Lord Lambeth continued to meditate. "I asked her to call," he said
simply.

"And she declined?"

"Yes; but she shall do it yet."

"Upon my word," said Percy Beaumont, "if she gets much more frightened I
believe she will." Lord Lambeth looked at him, and he went on. "She will
go to the girl herself."

"How do you mean she will go to her?"

"She will beg her off, or she will bribe her. She will take strong
measures."

Lord Lambeth turned away in silence, and his companion watched him take
twenty steps and then slowly return. "I have invited Mrs. Westgate and
Miss Alden to Branches," he said, "and this evening I shall name a day."

"And shall you invite your mother and your sisters to meet them?"

"Explicitly!"

"That will set the duchess off," said Percy Beaumont. "I suspect she
will come."

"She may do as she pleases."

Beaumont looked at Lord Lambeth. "You do really propose to marry the
little sister, then?"

"I like the way you talk about it!" cried the young man. "She won't
gobble me down; don't be afraid."

"She won't leave you on your knees," said Percy Beaumont. "What IS the
inducement?"

"You talk about proposing: wait till I HAVE proposed," Lord Lambeth went
on.

"That's right, my dear fellow; think about it," said Percy Beaumont.

"She's a charming girl," pursued his lordship.

"Of course she's a charming girl. I don't know a girl more charming,
intrinsically. But there are other charming girls nearer home."

"I like her spirit," observed Lord Lambeth, almost as if he were trying
to torment his cousin.

"What's the peculiarity of her spirit?"

"She's not afraid, and she says things out, and she thinks herself as
good as anyone. She is the only girl I have ever seen that was not dying
to marry me."

"How do you know that, if you haven't asked her?"

"I don't know how; but I know it."

"I am sure she asked me questions enough about your property and your
titles," said Beaumont.

"She has asked me questions, too; no end of them," Lord Lambeth
admitted. "But she asked for information, don't you know."

"Information? Aye, I'll warrant she wanted it. Depend upon it that she
is dying to marry you just as much and just as little as all the rest of
them."

"I shouldn't like her to refuse me--I shouldn't like that."

"If the thing would be so disagreeable, then, both to you and to her, in
Heaven's name leave it alone," said Percy Beaumont.

Mrs. Westgate, on her side, had plenty to say to her sister about the
rarity of Mr. Beaumont's visits and the nonappearance of the Duchess of
Bayswater. She professed, however, to derive more satisfaction from
this latter circumstance than she could have done from the most lavish
attentions on the part of this great lady. "It is most marked," she
said--"most marked. It is a delicious proof that we have made them
miserable. The day we dined with Lord Lambeth I was really sorry for the
poor fellow." It will have been gathered that the entertainment offered
by Lord Lambeth to his American friends had not been graced by the
presence of his anxious mother. He had invited several choice spirits
to meet them; but the ladies of his immediate family were to Mrs.
Westgate's sense--a sense possibly morbidly acute--conspicuous by their
absence.

"I don't want to express myself in a manner that you dislike," said
Bessie Alden; "but I don't know why you should have so many theories
about Lord Lambeth's poor mother. You know a great many young men in New
York without knowing their mothers."

Mrs. Westgate looked at her sister and then turned away. "My dear
Bessie, you are superb!" she said.

"One thing is certain," the young girl continued. "If I believed I were
a cause of annoyance--however unwitting--to Lord Lambeth's family, I
should insist--"

"Insist upon my leaving England," said Mrs. Westgate.

"No, not that. I want to go to the National Gallery again; I want to see
Stratford-on-Avon and Canterbury Cathedral. But I should insist upon his
coming to see us no more."

"That would be very modest and very pretty of you; but you wouldn't do
it now."

"Why do you say 'now'?" asked Bessie Alden. "Have I ceased to be
modest?"

"You care for him too much. A month ago, when you said you didn't, I
believe it was quite true. But at present, my dear child," said Mrs.
Westgate, "you wouldn't find it quite so simple a matter never to see
Lord Lambeth again. I have seen it coming on."

"You are mistaken," said Bessie. "You don't understand."

"My dear child, don't be perverse," rejoined her sister.

"I know him better, certainly, if you mean that," said Bessie. "And I
like him very much. But I don't like him enough to make trouble for him
with his family. However, I don't believe in that."

"I like the way you say 'however,'" Mrs. Westgate exclaimed. "Come; you
would not marry him?"

"Oh, no," said the young girl.

Mrs. Westgate for a moment seemed vexed. "Why not, pray?" she demanded.

"Because I don't care to," said Bessie Alden.

The morning after Lord Lambeth had had, with Percy Beaumont, that
exchange of ideas which has just been narrated, the ladies at Jones's
Hotel received from his lordship a written invitation to pay their
projected visit to Branches Castle on the following Tuesday. "I think I
have made up a very pleasant party," the young nobleman said. "Several
people whom you know, and my mother and sisters, who have so long been
regrettably prevented from making your acquaintance." Bessie Alden lost
no time in calling her sister's attention to the injustice she had done
the Duchess of Bayswater, whose hostility was now proved to be a vain
illusion.

"Wait till you see if she comes," said Mrs. Westgate. "And if she is to
meet us at her son's house the obligation was all the greater for her to
call upon us."

Bessie had not to wait long, and it appeared that Lord Lambeth's mother
now accepted Mrs. Westgate's view of her duties. On the morrow, early in
the afternoon, two cards were brought to the apartment of the American
ladies--one of them bearing the name of the Duchess of Bayswater and
the other that of the Countess of Pimlico. Mrs. Westgate glanced at the
clock. "It is not yet four," she said; "they have come early; they wish
to see us. We will receive them." And she gave orders that her visitors
should be admitted. A few moments later they were introduced, and there
was a solemn exchange of amenities. The duchess was a large lady, with a
fine fresh color; the Countess of Pimlico was very pretty and elegant.

The duchess looked about her as she sat down--looked not especially at
Mrs. Westgate. "I daresay my son has told you that I have been wanting
to come and see you," she observed.

"You are very kind," said Mrs. Westgate, vaguely--her conscience not
allowing her to assent to this proposition--and, indeed, not permitting
her to enunciate her own with any appreciable emphasis.

"He says you were so kind to him in America," said the duchess.

"We are very glad," Mrs. Westgate replied, "to have been able to make
him a little more--a little less--a little more comfortable."

"I think he stayed at your house," remarked the Duchess of Bayswater,
looking at Bessie Alden.

"A very short time," said Mrs. Westgate.

"Oh!" said the duchess; and she continued to look at Bessie, who was
engaged in conversation with her daughter.

"Do you like London?" Lady Pimlico had asked of Bessie, after looking at
her a good deal--at her face and her hands, her dress and her hair.

"Very much indeed," said Bessie.

"Do you like this hotel?"

"It is very comfortable," said Bessie.

"Do you like stopping at hotels?" inquired Lady Pimlico after a pause.

"I am very fond of traveling," Bessie answered, "and I suppose hotels
are a necessary part of it. But they are not the part I am fondest of."

"Oh, I hate traveling," said the Countess of Pimlico and transferred her
attention to Mrs. Westgate.

"My son tells me you are going to Branches," the duchess presently
resumed.

"Lord Lambeth has been so good as to ask us," said Mrs. Westgate, who
perceived that her visitor had now begun to look at her, and who had her
customary happy consciousness of a distinguished appearance. The only
mitigation of her felicity on this point was that, having inspected her
visitor's own costume, she said to herself, "She won't know how well I
am dressed!"

"He has asked me to go, but I am not sure I shall be able," murmured the
duchess.

"He had offered us the p--prospect of meeting you," said Mrs. Westgate.

"I hate the country at this season," responded the duchess.

Mrs. Westgate gave a little shrug. "I think it is pleasanter than
London."

But the duchess's eyes were absent again; she was looking very fixedly
at Bessie. In a moment she slowly rose, walked to a chair that stood
empty at the young girl's right hand, and silently seated herself.
As she was a majestic, voluminous woman, this little transaction had,
inevitably, an air of somewhat impressive intention. It diffused a
certain awkwardness, which Lady Pimlico, as a sympathetic daughter,
perhaps desired to rectify in turning to Mrs. Westgate.

"I daresay you go out a great deal," she observed.

"No, very little. We are strangers, and we didn't come here for
society."

"I see," said Lady Pimlico. "It's rather nice in town just now."

"It's charming," said Mrs. Westgate. "But we only go to see a few
people--whom we like."

"Of course one can't like everyone," said Lady Pimlico.

"It depends upon one's society," Mrs. Westgate rejoined.

The Duchess meanwhile had addressed herself to Bessie. "My son tells me
the young ladies in America are so clever."

"I am glad they made so good an impression on him," said Bessie,
smiling.

The Duchess was not smiling; her large fresh face was very tranquil.
"He is very susceptible," she said. "He thinks everyone clever, and
sometimes they are."

"Sometimes," Bessie assented, smiling still.

The duchess looked at her a little and then went on; "Lambeth is very
susceptible, but he is very volatile, too."

"Volatile?" asked Bessie.

"He is very inconstant. It won't do to depend on him."

"Ah," said Bessie, "I don't recognize that description. We have depended
on him greatly--my sister and I--and he has never disappointed us."

"He will disappoint you yet," said the duchess.

Bessie gave a little laugh, as if she were amused at the duchess's
persistency. "I suppose it will depend on what we expect of him."

"The less you expect, the better," Lord Lambeth's mother declared.

"Well," said Bessie, "we expect nothing unreasonable."

The duchess for a moment was silent, though she appeared to have more to
say. "Lambeth says he has seen so much of you," she presently began.

"He has been to see us very often; he has been very kind," said Bessie
Alden.

"I daresay you are used to that. I am told there is a great deal of that
in America."

"A great deal of kindness?" the young girl inquired, smiling.

"Is that what you call it? I know you have different expressions."

"We certainly don't always understand each other," said Mrs. Westgate,
the termination of whose interview with Lady Pimlico allowed her to give
her attention to their elder visitor.

"I am speaking of the young men calling so much upon the young ladies,"
the duchess explained.

"But surely in England," said Mrs. Westgate, "the young ladies don't
call upon the young men?"

"Some of them do--almost!" Lady Pimlico declared. "When the young men
are a great PARTI."

"Bessie, you must make a note of that," said Mrs. Westgate. "My sister,"
she added, "is a model traveler. She writes down all the curious facts
she hears in a little book she keeps for the purpose."

The duchess was a little flushed; she looked all about the room, while
her daughter turned to Bessie. "My brother told us you were wonderfully
clever," said Lady Pimlico.

"He should have said my sister," Bessie answered--"when she says such
things as that."

"Shall you be long at Branches?" the duchess asked, abruptly, of the
young girl.

"Lord Lambeth has asked us for three days," said Bessie.

"I shall go," the duchess declared, "and my daughter, too."

"That will be charming!" Bessie rejoined.

"Delightful!" murmured Mrs. Westgate.

"I shall expect to see a great deal of you," the duchess continued.
"When I go to Branches I monopolize my son's guests."

"They must be most happy," said Mrs. Westgate very graciously.

"I want immensely to see it--to see the castle," said Bessie to the
duchess. "I have never seen one--in England, at least; and you know we
have none in America."

"Ah, you are fond of castles?" inquired her Grace.

"Immensely!" replied the young girl. "It has been the dream of my life
to live in one."

The duchess looked at her a moment, as if she hardly knew how to take
this assurance, which, from her Grace's point of view, was either very
artless or very audacious. "Well," she said, rising, "I will show
you Branches myself." And upon this the two great ladies took their
departure.

"What did they mean by it?" asked Mrs. Westgate, when they were gone.

"They meant to be polite," said Bessie, "because we are going to meet
them."

"It is too late to be polite," Mrs. Westgate replied almost grimly.
"They meant to overawe us by their fine manners and their grandeur, and
to make you LACHER PRISE."

"LACHER PRISE? What strange things you say!" murmured Bessie Alden.

"They meant to snub us, so that we shouldn't dare to go to Branches,"
Mrs. Westgate continued.

"On the contrary," said Bessie, "the duchess offered to show me the
place herself."

"Yes, you may depend upon it she won't let you out of her sight. She
will show you the place from morning till night."

"You have a theory for everything," said Bessie.

"And you apparently have none for anything."

"I saw no attempt to 'overawe' us," said the young girl. "Their manners
were not fine."

"They were not even good!" Mrs. Westgate declared.

Bessie was silent a while, but in a few moments she observed that she
had a very good theory. "They came to look at me," she said, as if this
had been a very ingenious hypothesis. Mrs. Westgate did it justice;
she greeted it with a smile and pronounced it most brilliant, while, in
reality, she felt that the young girl's skepticism, or her charity, or,
as she had sometimes called it appropriately, her idealism, was proof
against irony. Bessie, however, remained meditative all the rest of that
day and well on into the morrow.

On the morrow, before lunch, Mrs. Westgate had occasion to go out for an
hour, and left her sister writing a letter. When she came back she
met Lord Lambeth at the door of the hotel, coming away. She thought he
looked slightly embarrassed; he was certainly very grave. "I am sorry to
have missed you. Won't you come back?" she asked.

"No," said the young man, "I can't. I have seen your sister. I can never
come back." Then he looked at her a moment and took her hand. "Goodbye,
Mrs. Westgate," he said. "You have been very kind to me." And with what
she thought a strange, sad look in his handsome young face, he turned
away.

She went in, and she found Bessie still writing her letter; that is,
Mrs. Westgate perceived she was sitting at the table with the pen in her
hand and not writing. "Lord Lambeth has been here," said the elder lady
at last.

Then Bessie got up and showed her a pale, serious face. She bent this
face upon her sister for some time, confessing silently and a little
pleading. "I told him," she said at last, "that we could not go to
Branches."

Mrs. Westgate displayed just a spark of irritation. "He might have
waited," she said with a smile, "till one had seen the castle." Later,
an hour afterward, she said, "Dear Bessie, I wish you might have
accepted him."

"I couldn't," said Bessie gently.

"He is an excellent fellow," said Mrs. Westgate.

"I couldn't," Bessie repeated.

"If it is only," her sister added, "because those women will think that
they succeeded--that they paralyzed us!"

Bessie Alden turned away; but presently she added, "They were
interesting; I should have liked to see them again."

"So should I!" cried Mrs. Westgate significantly.

"And I should have liked to see the castle," said Bessie. "But now we
must leave England," she added.

Her sister looked at her. "You will not wait to go to the National
Gallery?"

"Not now."

"Nor to Canterbury Cathedral?"

Bessie reflected a moment. "We can stop there on our way to Paris," she
said.

Lord Lambeth did not tell Percy Beaumont that the contingency he was
not prepared at all to like had occurred; but Percy Beaumont, on hearing
that the two ladies had left London, wondered with some intensity what
had happened; wondered, that is, until the Duchess of Bayswater came
a little to his assistance. The two ladies went to Paris, and Mrs.
Westgate beguiled the journey to that city by repeating several
times--"That's what I regret; they will think they petrified us." But
Bessie Alden seemed to regret nothing.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of An International Episode, by Henry James

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN INTERNATIONAL EPISODE ***

***** This file should be named 210.txt or 210.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/210/

Produced by Judith Boss

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Aspern Papers, by Henry James

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Aspern Papers

Author: Henry James

Release Date: June 29, 2008 [EBook #211]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ASPERN PAPERS ***




Produced by Judith Boss





THE ASPERN PAPERS

By Henry James


First American book edition,

Macmillan and Co., 1888.





I


I had taken Mrs. Prest into my confidence; in truth without her I
should have made but little advance, for the fruitful idea in the whole
business dropped from her friendly lips. It was she who invented the
short cut, who severed the Gordian knot. It is not supposed to be the
nature of women to rise as a general thing to the largest and most
liberal view--I mean of a practical scheme; but it has struck me that
they sometimes throw off a bold conception--such as a man would not have
risen to--with singular serenity. "Simply ask them to take you in on the
footing of a lodger"--I don't think that unaided I should have risen to
that. I was beating about the bush, trying to be ingenious, wondering
by what combination of arts I might become an acquaintance, when she
offered this happy suggestion that the way to become an acquaintance was
first to become an inmate. Her actual knowledge of the Misses Bordereau
was scarcely larger than mine, and indeed I had brought with me from
England some definite facts which were new to her. Their name had been
mixed up ages before with one of the greatest names of the century, and
they lived now in Venice in obscurity, on very small means, unvisited,
unapproachable, in a dilapidated old palace on an out-of-the-way canal:
this was the substance of my friend's impression of them. She herself
had been established in Venice for fifteen years and had done a great
deal of good there; but the circle of her benevolence did not include
the two shy, mysterious and, as it was somehow supposed, scarcely
respectable Americans (they were believed to have lost in their long
exile all national quality, besides having had, as their name implied,
some French strain in their origin), who asked no favors and desired no
attention. In the early years of her residence she had made an attempt
to see them, but this had been successful only as regards the little
one, as Mrs. Prest called the niece; though in reality as I afterward
learned she was considerably the bigger of the two. She had heard Miss
Bordereau was ill and had a suspicion that she was in want; and she had
gone to the house to offer assistance, so that if there were suffering
(and American suffering), she should at least not have it on her
conscience. The "little one" received her in the great cold, tarnished
Venetian sala, the central hall of the house, paved with marble and
roofed with dim crossbeams, and did not even ask her to sit down. This
was not encouraging for me, who wished to sit so fast, and I remarked
as much to Mrs. Prest. She however replied with profundity, "Ah, but
there's all the difference: I went to confer a favor and you will go
to ask one. If they are proud you will be on the right side." And she
offered to show me their house to begin with--to row me thither in her
gondola. I let her know that I had already been to look at it half a
dozen times; but I accepted her invitation, for it charmed me to hover
about the place. I had made my way to it the day after my arrival in
Venice (it had been described to me in advance by the friend in England
to whom I owed definite information as to their possession of the
papers), and I had besieged it with my eyes while I considered my plan
of campaign. Jeffrey Aspern had never been in it that I knew of;
but some note of his voice seemed to abide there by a roundabout
implication, a faint reverberation.

Mrs. Prest knew nothing about the papers, but she was interested in my
curiosity, as she was always interested in the joys and sorrows of her
friends. As we went, however, in her gondola, gliding there under the
sociable hood with the bright Venetian picture framed on either side by
the movable window, I could see that she was amused by my infatuation,
the way my interest in the papers had become a fixed idea. "One would
think you expected to find in them the answer to the riddle of the
universe," she said; and I denied the impeachment only by replying
that if I had to choose between that precious solution and a bundle
of Jeffrey Aspern's letters I knew indeed which would appear to me the
greater boon. She pretended to make light of his genius, and I took
no pains to defend him. One doesn't defend one's god: one's god is
in himself a defense. Besides, today, after his long comparative
obscuration, he hangs high in the heaven of our literature, for all the
world to see; he is a part of the light by which we walk. The most I
said was that he was no doubt not a woman's poet: to which she rejoined
aptly enough that he had been at least Miss Bordereau's. The strange
thing had been for me to discover in England that she was still alive:
it was as if I had been told Mrs. Siddons was, or Queen Caroline, or
the famous Lady Hamilton, for it seemed to me that she belonged to a
generation as extinct. "Why, she must be tremendously old--at least a
hundred," I had said; but on coming to consider dates I saw that it was
not strictly necessary that she should have exceeded by very much the
common span. Nonetheless she was very far advanced in life, and her
relations with Jeffrey Aspern had occurred in her early womanhood.
"That is her excuse," said Mrs. Prest, half-sententiously and yet also
somewhat as if she were ashamed of making a speech so little in the
real tone of Venice. As if a woman needed an excuse for having loved the
divine poet! He had been not only one of the most brilliant minds of
his day (and in those years, when the century was young, there were,
as everyone knows, many), but one of the most genial men and one of the
handsomest.

The niece, according to Mrs. Prest, was not so old, and she risked the
conjecture that she was only a grandniece. This was possible; I had
nothing but my share in the very limited knowledge of my English fellow
worshipper John Cumnor, who had never seen the couple. The world, as I
say, had recognized Jeffrey Aspern, but Cumnor and I had recognized him
most. The multitude, today, flocked to his temple, but of that temple he
and I regarded ourselves as the ministers. We held, justly, as I think,
that we had done more for his memory than anyone else, and we had done
it by opening lights into his life. He had nothing to fear from us
because he had nothing to fear from the truth, which alone at such a
distance of time we could be interested in establishing. His early
death had been the only dark spot in his life, unless the papers in Miss
Bordereau's hands should perversely bring out others. There had been an
impression about 1825 that he had "treated her badly," just as there had
been an impression that he had "served," as the London populace says,
several other ladies in the same way. Each of these cases Cumnor and
I had been able to investigate, and we had never failed to acquit
him conscientiously of shabby behavior. I judged him perhaps more
indulgently than my friend; certainly, at any rate, it appeared to me
that no man could have walked straighter in the given circumstances.
These were almost always awkward. Half the women of his time, to speak
liberally, had flung themselves at his head, and out of this pernicious
fashion many complications, some of them grave, had not failed to arise.
He was not a woman's poet, as I had said to Mrs. Prest, in the modern
phase of his reputation; but the situation had been different when
the man's own voice was mingled with his song. That voice, by every
testimony, was one of the sweetest ever heard. "Orpheus and the
Maenads!" was the exclamation that rose to my lips when I first turned
over his correspondence. Almost all the Maenads were unreasonable, and
many of them insupportable; it struck me in short that he was kinder,
more considerate than, in his place (if I could imagine myself in such a
place!) I should have been.

It was certainly strange beyond all strangeness, and I shall not take
up space with attempting to explain it, that whereas in all these other
lines of research we had to deal with phantoms and dust, the mere echoes
of echoes, the one living source of information that had lingered
on into our time had been unheeded by us. Every one of Aspern's
contemporaries had, according to our belief, passed away; we had not
been able to look into a single pair of eyes into which his had looked
or to feel a transmitted contact in any aged hand that his had touched.
Most dead of all did poor Miss Bordereau appear, and yet she alone had
survived. We exhausted in the course of months our wonder that we had
not found her out sooner, and the substance of our explanation was that
she had kept so quiet. The poor lady on the whole had had reason for
doing so. But it was a revelation to us that it was possible to keep so
quiet as that in the latter half of the nineteenth century--the age of
newspapers and telegrams and photographs and interviewers. And she had
taken no great trouble about it either: she had not hidden herself away
in an undiscoverable hole; she had boldly settled down in a city of
exhibition. The only secret of her safety that we could perceive was
that Venice contained so many curiosities that were greater than she.
And then accident had somehow favored her, as was shown for example in
the fact that Mrs. Prest had never happened to mention her to me, though
I had spent three weeks in Venice--under her nose, as it were--five
years before. Mrs. Prest had not mentioned this much to anyone; she
appeared almost to have forgotten she was there. Of course she had not
the responsibilities of an editor. It was no explanation of the
old woman's having eluded us to say that she lived abroad, for our
researches had again and again taken us (not only by correspondence
but by personal inquiry) to France, to Germany, to Italy, in which
countries, not counting his important stay in England, so many of the
too few years of Aspern's career were spent. We were glad to think at
least that in all our publishings (some people consider I believe that
we have overdone them), we had only touched in passing and in the most
discreet manner on Miss Bordereau's connection. Oddly enough, even if we
had had the material (and we often wondered what had become of it), it
would have been the most difficult episode to handle.

The gondola stopped, the old palace was there; it was a house of the
class which in Venice carries even in extreme dilapidation the dignified
name. "How charming! It's gray and pink!" my companion exclaimed;
and that is the most comprehensive description of it. It was not
particularly old, only two or three centuries; and it had an air not so
much of decay as of quiet discouragement, as if it had rather missed its
career. But its wide front, with a stone balcony from end to end of the
piano nobile or most important floor, was architectural enough, with the
aid of various pilasters and arches; and the stucco with which in the
intervals it had long ago been endued was rosy in the April afternoon.
It overlooked a clean, melancholy, unfrequented canal, which had
a narrow riva or convenient footway on either side. "I don't know
why--there are no brick gables," said Mrs. Prest, "but this corner has
seemed to me before more Dutch than Italian, more like Amsterdam than
like Venice. It's perversely clean, for reasons of its own; and though
you can pass on foot scarcely anyone ever thinks of doing so. It has the
air of a Protestant Sunday. Perhaps the people are afraid of the Misses
Bordereau. I daresay they have the reputation of witches."

I forget what answer I made to this--I was given up to two other
reflections. The first of these was that if the old lady lived in such a
big, imposing house she could not be in any sort of misery and therefore
would not be tempted by a chance to let a couple of rooms. I expressed
this idea to Mrs. Prest, who gave me a very logical reply. "If she
didn't live in a big house how could it be a question of her having
rooms to spare? If she were not amply lodged herself you would lack
ground to approach her. Besides, a big house here, and especially in
this quartier perdu, proves nothing at all: it is perfectly compatible
with a state of penury. Dilapidated old palazzi, if you will go out of
the way for them, are to be had for five shillings a year. And as for
the people who live in them--no, until you have explored Venice socially
as much as I have you can form no idea of their domestic desolation.
They live on nothing, for they have nothing to live on." The other idea
that had come into my head was connected with a high blank wall which
appeared to confine an expanse of ground on one side of the house.
Blank I call it, but it was figured over with the patches that please a
painter, repaired breaches, crumblings of plaster, extrusions of brick
that had turned pink with time; and a few thin trees, with the poles of
certain rickety trellises, were visible over the top. The place was a
garden, and apparently it belonged to the house. It suddenly occurred to
me that if it did belong to the house I had my pretext.

I sat looking out on all this with Mrs. Prest (it was covered with the
golden glow of Venice) from the shade of our felze, and she asked me if
I would go in then, while she waited for me, or come back another time.
At first I could not decide--it was doubtless very weak of me. I wanted
still to think I MIGHT get a footing, and I was afraid to meet failure,
for it would leave me, as I remarked to my companion, without another
arrow for my bow. "Why not another?" she inquired as I sat there
hesitating and thinking it over; and she wished to know why even now
and before taking the trouble of becoming an inmate (which might be
wretchedly uncomfortable after all, even if it succeeded), I had not
the resource of simply offering them a sum of money down. In that way I
might obtain the documents without bad nights.

"Dearest lady," I exclaimed, "excuse the impatience of my tone when
I suggest that you must have forgotten the very fact (surely I
communicated it to you) which pushed me to throw myself upon your
ingenuity. The old woman won't have the documents spoken of; they are
personal, delicate, intimate, and she hasn't modern notions, God bless
her! If I should sound that note first I should certainly spoil the
game. I can arrive at the papers only by putting her off her guard, and
I can put her off her guard only by ingratiating diplomatic practices.
Hypocrisy, duplicity are my only chance. I am sorry for it, but for
Jeffrey Aspern's sake I would do worse still. First I must take tea with
her; then tackle the main job." And I told over what had happened to
John Cumnor when he wrote to her. No notice whatever had been taken of
his first letter, and the second had been answered very sharply, in six
lines, by the niece. "Miss Bordereau requested her to say that she
could not imagine what he meant by troubling them. They had none of Mr.
Aspern's papers, and if they had should never think of showing them
to anyone on any account whatever. She didn't know what he was talking
about and begged he would let her alone." I certainly did not want to be
met that way.

"Well," said Mrs. Prest after a moment, provokingly, "perhaps after all
they haven't any of his things. If they deny it flat how are you sure?"

"John Cumnor is sure, and it would take me long to tell you how his
conviction, or his very strong presumption--strong enough to stand
against the old lady's not unnatural fib--has built itself up. Besides,
he makes much of the internal evidence of the niece's letter."

"The internal evidence?"

"Her calling him 'Mr. Aspern.'"

"I don't see what that proves."

"It proves familiarity, and familiarity implies the possession of
mementoes, or relics. I can't tell you how that 'Mr.' touches me--how it
bridges over the gulf of time and brings our hero near to me--nor what
an edge it gives to my desire to see Juliana. You don't say, 'Mr.'
Shakespeare."

"Would I, any more, if I had a box full of his letters?"

"Yes, if he had been your lover and someone wanted them!" And I added
that John Cumnor was so convinced, and so all the more convinced by
Miss Bordereau's tone, that he would have come himself to Venice on the
business were it not that for him there was the obstacle that it would
be difficult to disprove his identity with the person who had written
to them, which the old ladies would be sure to suspect in spite of
dissimulation and a change of name. If they were to ask him point-blank
if he were not their correspondent it would be too awkward for him to
lie; whereas I was fortunately not tied in that way. I was a fresh hand
and could say no without lying.

"But you will have to change your name," said Mrs. Prest. "Juliana lives
out of the world as much as it is possible to live, but none the less
she has probably heard of Mr. Aspern's editors; she perhaps possesses
what you have published."

"I have thought of that," I returned; and I drew out of my pocketbook a
visiting card, neatly engraved with a name that was not my own.

"You are very extravagant; you might have written it," said my
companion.

"This looks more genuine."

"Certainly, you are prepared to go far! But it will be awkward about
your letters; they won't come to you in that mask."

"My banker will take them in, and I will go every day to fetch them. It
will give me a little walk."

"Shall you only depend upon that?" asked Mrs. Prest. "Aren't you coming
to see me?"

"Oh, you will have left Venice, for the hot months, long before
there are any results. I am prepared to roast all summer--as well as
hereafter, perhaps you'll say! Meanwhile, John Cumnor will bombard me
with letters addressed, in my feigned name, to the care of the padrona."

"She will recognize his hand," my companion suggested.

"On the envelope he can disguise it."

"Well, you're a precious pair! Doesn't it occur to you that even if you
are able to say you are not Mr. Cumnor in person they may still suspect
you of being his emissary?"

"Certainly, and I see only one way to parry that."

"And what may that be?"

I hesitated a moment. "To make love to the niece."

"Ah," cried Mrs. Prest, "wait till you see her!"




II


"I must work the garden--I must work the garden," I said to myself, five
minutes later, as I waited, upstairs, in the long, dusky sala, where the
bare scagliola floor gleamed vaguely in a chink of the closed shutters.
The place was impressive but it looked cold and cautious. Mrs. Prest had
floated away, giving me a rendezvous at the end of half an hour by
some neighboring water steps; and I had been let into the house,
after pulling the rusty bell wire, by a little red-headed, white-faced
maidservant, who was very young and not ugly and wore clicking pattens
and a shawl in the fashion of a hood. She had not contented herself
with opening the door from above by the usual arrangement of a creaking
pulley, though she had looked down at me first from an upper window,
dropping the inevitable challenge which in Italy precedes the hospitable
act. As a general thing I was irritated by this survival of medieval
manners, though as I liked the old I suppose I ought to have liked it;
but I was so determined to be genial that I took my false card out of
my pocket and held it up to her, smiling as if it were a magic token. It
had the effect of one indeed, for it brought her, as I say, all the way
down. I begged her to hand it to her mistress, having first written
on it in Italian the words, "Could you very kindly see a gentleman,
an American, for a moment?" The little maid was not hostile, and I
reflected that even that was perhaps something gained. She colored,
she smiled and looked both frightened and pleased. I could see that my
arrival was a great affair, that visits were rare in that house, and
that she was a person who would have liked a sociable place. When she
pushed forward the heavy door behind me I felt that I had a foot in the
citadel. She pattered across the damp, stony lower hall and I followed
her up the high staircase--stonier still, as it seemed--without an
invitation. I think she had meant I should wait for her below, but such
was not my idea, and I took up my station in the sala. She flitted, at
the far end of it, into impenetrable regions, and I looked at the place
with my heart beating as I had known it to do in the dentist's parlor.
It was gloomy and stately, but it owed its character almost entirely
to its noble shape and to the fine architectural doors--as high as
the doors of houses--which, leading into the various rooms, repeated
themselves on either side at intervals. They were surmounted with old
faded painted escutcheons, and here and there, in the spaces between
them, brown pictures, which I perceived to be bad, in battered frames,
were suspended. With the exception of several straw-bottomed chairs with
their backs to the wall, the grand obscure vista contained nothing else
to minister to effect. It was evidently never used save as a passage,
and little even as that. I may add that by the time the door opened
again through which the maidservant had escaped, my eyes had grown used
to the want of light.

I had not meant by my private ejaculation that I must myself cultivate
the soil of the tangled enclosure which lay beneath the windows, but the
lady who came toward me from the distance over the hard, shining floor
might have supposed as much from the way in which, as I went rapidly to
meet her, I exclaimed, taking care to speak Italian: "The garden, the
garden--do me the pleasure to tell me if it's yours!"

She stopped short, looking at me with wonder; and then, "Nothing here is
mine," she answered in English, coldly and sadly.

"Oh, you are English; how delightful!" I remarked, ingenuously. "But
surely the garden belongs to the house?"

"Yes, but the house doesn't belong to me." She was a long, lean, pale
person, habited apparently in a dull-colored dressing gown, and she
spoke with a kind of mild literalness. She did not ask me to sit down,
any more than years before (if she were the niece) she had asked Mrs.
Prest, and we stood face to face in the empty pompous hall.

"Well then, would you kindly tell me to whom I must address myself? I'm
afraid you'll think me odiously intrusive, but you know I MUST have a
garden--upon my honor I must!"

Her face was not young, but it was simple; it was not fresh, but it was
mild. She had large eyes which were not bright, and a great deal of hair
which was not "dressed," and long fine hands which were--possibly--not
clean. She clasped these members almost convulsively as, with a
confused, alarmed look, she broke out, "Oh, don't take it away from us;
we like it ourselves!"

"You have the use of it then?"

"Oh, yes. If it wasn't for that!" And she gave a shy, melancholy smile.

"Isn't it a luxury, precisely? That's why, intending to be in Venice
some weeks, possibly all summer, and having some literary work, some
reading and writing to do, so that I must be quiet, and yet if possible
a great deal in the open air--that's why I have felt that a garden
is really indispensable. I appeal to your own experience," I went on,
smiling. "Now can't I look at yours?"

"I don't know, I don't understand," the poor woman murmured, planted
there and letting her embarrassed eyes wander all over my strangeness.

"I mean only from one of those windows--such grand ones as you have
here--if you will let me open the shutters." And I walked toward the
back of the house. When I had advanced halfway I stopped and waited, as
if I took it for granted she would accompany me. I had been of necessity
very abrupt, but I strove at the same time to give her the impression of
extreme courtesy. "I have been looking at furnished rooms all over
the place, and it seems impossible to find any with a garden attached.
Naturally in a place like Venice gardens are rare. It's absurd if you
like, for a man, but I can't live without flowers."

"There are none to speak of down there." She came nearer to me, as if,
though she mistrusted me, I had drawn her by an invisible thread. I went
on again, and she continued as she followed me: "We have a few, but they
are very common. It costs too much to cultivate them; one has to have a
man."

"Why shouldn't I be the man?" I asked. "I'll work without wages; or
rather I'll put in a gardener. You shall have the sweetest flowers in
Venice."

She protested at this, with a queer little sigh which might also have
been a gush of rapture at the picture I presented. Then she observed,
"We don't know you--we don't know you."

"You know me as much as I know you: that is much more, because you know
my name. And if you are English I am almost a countryman."

"We are not English," said my companion, watching me helplessly while I
threw open the shutters of one of the divisions of the wide high window.

"You speak the language so beautifully: might I ask what you are?" Seen
from above the garden was certainly shabby; but I perceived at a glance
that it had great capabilities. She made no rejoinder, she was so lost
in staring at me, and I exclaimed, "You don't mean to say you are also
by chance American?"

"I don't know; we used to be."

"Used to be? Surely you haven't changed?"

"It's so many years ago--we are nothing."

"So many years that you have been living here? Well, I don't wonder at
that; it's a grand old house. I suppose you all use the garden," I went
on, "but I assure you I shouldn't be in your way. I would be very quiet
and stay in one corner."

"We all use it?" she repeated after me, vaguely, not coming close to
the window but looking at my shoes. She appeared to think me capable of
throwing her out.

"I mean all your family, as many as you are."

"There is only one other; she is very old--she never goes down."

"Only one other, in all this great house!" I feigned to be not only
amazed but almost scandalized. "Dear lady, you must have space then to
spare!"

"To spare?" she repeated, in the same dazed way.

"Why, you surely don't live (two quiet women--I see YOU are quiet,
at any rate) in fifty rooms!" Then with a burst of hope and cheer I
demanded: "Couldn't you let me two or three? That would set me up!"

I had not struck the note that translated my purpose, and I need
not reproduce the whole of the tune I played. I ended by making my
interlocutress believe that I was an honorable person, though of course
I did not even attempt to persuade her that I was not an eccentric one.
I repeated that I had studies to pursue; that I wanted quiet; that I
delighted in a garden and had vainly sought one up and down the city;
that I would undertake that before another month was over the dear old
house should be smothered in flowers. I think it was the flowers that
won my suit, for I afterward found that Miss Tita (for such the name of
this high tremulous spinster proved somewhat incongruously to be) had an
insatiable appetite for them. When I speak of my suit as won I mean that
before I left her she had promised that she would refer the question to
her aunt. I inquired who her aunt might be and she answered, "Why, Miss
Bordereau!" with an air of surprise, as if I might have been expected to
know. There were contradictions like this in Tita Bordereau which, as I
observed later, contributed to make her an odd and affecting person.
It was the study of the two ladies to live so that the world should not
touch them, and yet they had never altogether accepted the idea that it
never heard of them. In Tita at any rate a grateful susceptibility to
human contact had not died out, and contact of a limited order there
would be if I should come to live in the house.

"We have never done anything of the sort; we have never had a lodger or
any kind of inmate." So much as this she made a point of saying to me.
"We are very poor, we live very badly. The rooms are very bare--that you
might take; they have nothing in them. I don't know how you would sleep,
how you would eat."

"With your permission, I could easily put in a bed and a few tables and
chairs. C'est la moindre des choses and the affair of an hour or two.
I know a little man from whom I can hire what I should want for a few
months, for a trifle, and my gondolier can bring the things round in his
boat. Of course in this great house you must have a second kitchen, and
my servant, who is a wonderfully handy fellow" (this personage was an
evocation of the moment), "can easily cook me a chop there. My tastes
and habits are of the simplest; I live on flowers!" And then I ventured
to add that if they were very poor it was all the more reason they
should let their rooms. They were bad economists--I had never heard of
such a waste of material.

I saw in a moment that the good lady had never before been spoken to
in that way, with a kind of humorous firmness which did not exclude
sympathy but was on the contrary founded on it. She might easily have
told me that my sympathy was impertinent, but this by good fortune
did not occur to her. I left her with the understanding that she would
consider the matter with her aunt and that I might come back the next
day for their decision.

"The aunt will refuse; she will think the whole proceeding very louche!"
Mrs. Prest declared shortly after this, when I had resumed my place in
her gondola. She had put the idea into my head and now (so little are
women to be counted on) she appeared to take a despondent view of it.
Her pessimism provoked me and I pretended to have the best hopes; I
went so far as to say that I had a distinct presentiment that I should
succeed. Upon this Mrs. Prest broke out, "Oh, I see what's in your head!
You fancy you have made such an impression in a quarter of an hour that
she is dying for you to come and can be depended upon to bring the old
one round. If you do get in you'll count it as a triumph."

I did count it as a triumph, but only for the editor (in the last
analysis), not for the man, who had not the tradition of personal
conquest. When I went back on the morrow the little maidservant
conducted me straight through the long sala (it opened there as before
in perfect perspective and was lighter now, which I thought a good
omen) into the apartment from which the recipient of my former visit had
emerged on that occasion. It was a large shabby parlor, with a fine
old painted ceiling and a strange figure sitting alone at one of the
windows. They come back to me now almost with the palpitation they
caused, the successive feelings that accompanied my consciousness that
as the door of the room closed behind me I was really face to face with
the Juliana of some of Aspern's most exquisite and most renowned lyrics.
I grew used to her afterward, though never completely; but as she sat
there before me my heart beat as fast as if the miracle of resurrection
had taken place for my benefit. Her presence seemed somehow to contain
his, and I felt nearer to him at that first moment of seeing her than
I ever had been before or ever have been since. Yes, I remember my
emotions in their order, even including a curious little tremor that
took me when I saw that the niece was not there. With her, the day
before, I had become sufficiently familiar, but it almost exceeded my
courage (much as I had longed for the event) to be left alone with
such a terrible relic as the aunt. She was too strange, too literally
resurgent. Then came a check, with the perception that we were not
really face to face, inasmuch as she had over her eyes a horrible
green shade which, for her, served almost as a mask. I believed for the
instant that she had put it on expressly, so that from underneath it she
might scrutinize me without being scrutinized herself. At the same
time it increased the presumption that there was a ghastly death's-head
lurking behind it. The divine Juliana as a grinning skull--the vision
hung there until it passed. Then it came to me that she WAS tremendously
old--so old that death might take her at any moment, before I had time
to get what I wanted from her. The next thought was a correction to
that; it lighted up the situation. She would die next week, she would
die tomorrow--then I could seize her papers. Meanwhile she sat there
neither moving nor speaking. She was very small and shrunken, bent
forward, with her hands in her lap. She was dressed in black, and her
head was wrapped in a piece of old black lace which showed no hair.

My emotion keeping me silent she spoke first, and the remark she made
was exactly the most unexpected.




III


"Our house is very far from the center, but the little canal is very
comme il faut."

"It's the sweetest corner of Venice and I can imagine nothing more
charming," I hastened to reply. The old lady's voice was very thin and
weak, but it had an agreeable, cultivated murmur, and there was wonder
in the thought that that individual note had been in Jeffrey Aspern's
ear.

"Please to sit down there. I hear very well," she said quietly, as if
perhaps I had been shouting at her; and the chair she pointed to was
at a certain distance. I took possession of it, telling her that I
was perfectly aware that I had intruded, that I had not been properly
introduced and could only throw myself upon her indulgence. Perhaps the
other lady, the one I had had the honor of seeing the day before, would
have explained to her about the garden. That was literally what had
given me courage to take a step so unconventional. I had fallen in love
at sight with the whole place (she herself probably was so used to
it that she did not know the impression it was capable of making on a
stranger), and I had felt it was really a case to risk something. Was
her own kindness in receiving me a sign that I was not wholly out in
my calculation? It would render me extremely happy to think so. I could
give her my word of honor that I was a most respectable, inoffensive
person and that as an inmate they would be barely conscious of my
existence. I would conform to any regulations, any restrictions if they
would only let me enjoy the garden. Moreover I should be delighted to
give her references, guarantees; they would be of the very best, both in
Venice and in England as well as in America.

She listened to me in perfect stillness and I felt that she was looking
at me with great attention, though I could see only the lower part of
her bleached and shriveled face. Independently of the refining process
of old age it had a delicacy which once must have been great. She had
been very fair, she had had a wonderful complexion. She was silent a
little after I had ceased speaking; then she inquired, "If you are so
fond of a garden why don't you go to terra firma, where there are so
many far better than this?"

"Oh, it's the combination!" I answered, smiling; and then, with rather a
flight of fancy, "It's the idea of a garden in the middle of the sea."

"It's not in the middle of the sea; you can't see the water."

I stared a moment, wondering whether she wished to convict me of fraud.
"Can't see the water? Why, dear madam, I can come up to the very gate in
my boat."

She appeared inconsequent, for she said vaguely in reply to this, "Yes,
if you have got a boat. I haven't any; it's many years since I have been
in one of the gondolas." She uttered these words as if the gondolas were
a curious faraway craft which she knew only by hearsay.

"Let me assure you of the pleasure with which I would put mine at your
service!" I exclaimed. I had scarcely said this, however, before I
became aware that the speech was in questionable taste and might also do
me the injury of making me appear too eager, too possessed of a hidden
motive. But the old woman remained impenetrable and her attitude
bothered me by suggesting that she had a fuller vision of me than I
had of her. She gave me no thanks for my somewhat extravagant offer
but remarked that the lady I had seen the day before was her niece;
she would presently come in. She had asked her to stay away a little
on purpose, because she herself wished to see me at first alone. She
relapsed into silence, and I asked myself why she had judged this
necessary and what was coming yet; also whether I might venture on some
judicious remark in praise of her companion. I went so far as to say
that I should be delighted to see her again: she had been so very
courteous to me, considering how odd she must have thought me--a
declaration which drew from Miss Bordereau another of her whimsical
speeches.

"She has very good manners; I bred her up myself!" I was on the point
of saying that that accounted for the easy grace of the niece, but I
arrested myself in time, and the next moment the old woman went on:
"I don't care who you may be--I don't want to know; it signifies very
little today." This had all the air of being a formula of dismissal, as
if her next words would be that I might take myself off now that she
had had the amusement of looking on the face of such a monster of
indiscretion. Therefore I was all the more surprised when she added,
with her soft, venerable quaver, "You may have as many rooms as you
like--if you will pay a good deal of money."

I hesitated but for a single instant, long enough to ask myself what she
meant in particular by this condition. First it struck me that she must
have really a large sum in her mind; then I reasoned quickly that
her idea of a large sum would probably not correspond to my own. My
deliberation, I think, was not so visible as to diminish the promptitude
with which I replied, "I will pay with pleasure and of course in advance
whatever you may think is proper to ask me."

"Well then, a thousand francs a month," she rejoined instantly, while
her baffling green shade continued to cover her attitude.

The figure, as they say, was startling and my logic had been at fault.
The sum she had mentioned was, by the Venetian measure of such matters,
exceedingly large; there was many an old palace in an out-of-the-way
corner that I might on such terms have enjoyed by the year. But so far
as my small means allowed I was prepared to spend money, and my decision
was quickly taken. I would pay her with a smiling face what she asked,
but in that case I would give myself the compensation of extracting the
papers from her for nothing. Moreover if she had asked five times
as much I should have risen to the occasion; so odious would it have
appeared to me to stand chaffering with Aspern's Juliana. It was queer
enough to have a question of money with her at all. I assured her that
her views perfectly met my own and that on the morrow I should have the
pleasure of putting three months' rent into her hand. She received this
announcement with serenity and with no apparent sense that after all
it would be becoming of her to say that I ought to see the rooms first.
This did not occur to her and indeed her serenity was mainly what I
wanted. Our little bargain was just concluded when the door opened and
the younger lady appeared on the threshold. As soon as Miss Bordereau
saw her niece she cried out almost gaily, "He will give three
thousand--three thousand tomorrow!"

Miss Tita stood still, with her patient eyes turning from one of us to
the other; then she inquired, scarcely above her breath, "Do you mean
francs?"

"Did you mean francs or dollars?" the old woman asked of me at this.

"I think francs were what you said," I answered, smiling.

"That is very good," said Miss Tita, as if she had become conscious that
her own question might have looked overreaching.

"What do YOU know? You are ignorant," Miss Bordereau remarked; not with
acerbity but with a strange, soft coldness.

"Yes, of money--certainly of money!" Miss Tita hastened to exclaim.

"I am sure you have your own branches of knowledge," I took the liberty
of saying, genially. There was something painful to me, somehow, in the
turn the conversation had taken, in the discussion of the rent.

"She had a very good education when she was young. I looked into that
myself," said Miss Bordereau. Then she added, "But she has learned
nothing since."

"I have always been with you," Miss Tita rejoined very mildly, and
evidently with no intention of making an epigram.

"Yes, but for that!" her aunt declared with more satirical force. She
evidently meant that but for this her niece would never have got on
at all; the point of the observation however being lost on Miss Tita,
though she blushed at hearing her history revealed to a stranger. Miss
Bordereau went on, addressing herself to me: "And what time will you
come tomorrow with the money?"

"The sooner the better. If it suits you I will come at noon."

"I am always here but I have my hours," said the old woman, as if her
convenience were not to be taken for granted.

"You mean the times when you receive?"

"I never receive. But I will see you at noon, when you come with the
money."

"Very good, I shall be punctual;" and I added, "May I shake hands with
you, on our contract?" I thought there ought to be some little form, it
would make me really feel easier, for I foresaw that there would be
no other. Besides, though Miss Bordereau could not today be called
personally attractive and there was something even in her wasted
antiquity that bade one stand at one's distance, I felt an irresistible
desire to hold in my own for a moment the hand that Jeffrey Aspern had
pressed.

For a minute she made no answer, and I saw that my proposal failed to
meet with her approbation. She indulged in no movement of withdrawal,
which I half-expected; she only said coldly, "I belong to a time when
that was not the custom."

I felt rather snubbed but I exclaimed good humoredly to Miss Tita, "Oh,
you will do as well!" I shook hands with her while she replied, with a
small flutter, "Yes, yes, to show it's all arranged!"

"Shall you bring the money in gold?" Miss Bordereau demanded, as I was
turning to the door.

I looked at her for a moment. "Aren't you a little afraid, after all, of
keeping such a sum as that in the house?" It was not that I was annoyed
at her avidity but I was really struck with the disparity between such a
treasure and such scanty means of guarding it.

"Whom should I be afraid of if I am not afraid of you?" she asked with
her shrunken grimness.

"Ah well," said I, laughing, "I shall be in point of fact a protector
and I will bring gold if you prefer."

"Thank you," the old woman returned with dignity and with an inclination
of her head which evidently signified that I might depart. I passed out
of the room, reflecting that it would not be easy to circumvent her. As
I stood in the sala again I saw that Miss Tita had followed me, and I
supposed that as her aunt had neglected to suggest that I should take a
look at my quarters it was her purpose to repair the omission. But she
made no such suggestion; she only stood there with a dim, though not a
languid smile, and with an effect of irresponsible, incompetent youth
which was almost comically at variance with the faded facts of her
person. She was not infirm, like her aunt, but she struck me as still
more helpless, because her inefficiency was spiritual, which was not the
case with Miss Bordereau's. I waited to see if she would offer to
show me the rest of the house, but I did not precipitate the question,
inasmuch as my plan was from this moment to spend as much of my time as
possible in her society. I only observed at the end of a minute:

"I have had better fortune than I hoped. It was very kind of her to see
me. Perhaps you said a good word for me."

"It was the idea of the money," said Miss Tita.

"And did you suggest that?"

"I told her that you would perhaps give a good deal."

"What made you think that?"

"I told her I thought you were rich."

"And what put that idea into your head?"

"I don't know; the way you talked."

"Dear me, I must talk differently now," I declared. "I'm sorry to say
it's not the case."

"Well," said Miss Tita, "I think that in Venice the forestieri, in
general, often give a great deal for something that after all isn't
much." She appeared to make this remark with a comforting intention,
to wish to remind me that if I had been extravagant I was not really
foolishly singular. We walked together along the sala, and as I took its
magnificent measure I said to her that I was afraid it would not form
a part of my quartiere. Were my rooms by chance to be among those that
opened into it? "Not if you go above, on the second floor," she answered
with a little startled air, as if she had rather taken for granted I
would know my proper place.

"And I infer that that's where your aunt would like me to be."

"She said your apartments ought to be very distinct."

"That certainly would be best." And I listened with respect while she
told me that up above I was free to take whatever I liked; that there
was another staircase, but only from the floor on which we stood, and
that to pass from it to the garden-story or to come up to my lodging I
should have in effect to cross the great hall. This was an immense
point gained; I foresaw that it would constitute my whole leverage in
my relations with the two ladies. When I asked Miss Tita how I was to
manage at present to find my way up she replied with an access of that
sociable shyness which constantly marked her manner.

"Perhaps you can't. I don't see--unless I should go with you." She
evidently had not thought of this before.

We ascended to the upper floor and visited a long succession of empty
rooms. The best of them looked over the garden; some of the others had a
view of the blue lagoon, above the opposite rough-tiled housetops. They
were all dusty and even a little disfigured with long neglect, but I saw
that by spending a few hundred francs I should be able to convert three
or four of them into a convenient habitation. My experiment was turning
out costly, yet now that I had all but taken possession I ceased to
allow this to trouble me. I mentioned to my companion a few of the
things that I should put in, but she replied rather more precipitately
than usual that I might do exactly what I liked; she seemed to wish to
notify me that the Misses Bordereau would take no overt interest in my
proceedings. I guessed that her aunt had instructed her to adopt this
tone, and I may as well say now that I came afterward to distinguish
perfectly (as I believed) between the speeches she made on her own
responsibility and those the old lady imposed upon her. She took
no notice of the unswept condition of the rooms and indulged in no
explanations nor apologies. I said to myself that this was a sign that
Juliana and her niece (disenchanting idea!) were untidy persons, with a
low Italian standard; but I afterward recognized that a lodger who had
forced an entrance had no locus standi as a critic. We looked out of a
good many windows, for there was nothing within the rooms to look at,
and still I wanted to linger. I asked her what several different objects
in the prospect might be, but in no case did she appear to know. She was
evidently not familiar with the view--it was as if she had not looked
at it for years--and I presently saw that she was too preoccupied with
something else to pretend to care for it. Suddenly she said--the remark
was not suggested:

"I don't know whether it will make any difference to you, but the money
is for me."

"The money?"

"The money you are going to bring."

"Why, you'll make me wish to stay here two or three years." I spoke as
benevolently as possible, though it had begun to act on my nerves that
with these women so associated with Aspern the pecuniary question should
constantly come back.

"That would be very good for me," she replied, smiling.

"You put me on my honor!"

She looked as if she failed to understand this, but went on: "She wants
me to have more. She thinks she is going to die."

"Ah, not soon, I hope!" I exclaimed with genuine feeling. I had
perfectly considered the possibility that she would destroy her papers
on the day she should feel her end really approach. I believed that she
would cling to them till then, and I think I had an idea that she
read Aspern's letters over every night or at least pressed them to her
withered lips. I would have given a good deal to have a glimpse of the
latter spectacle. I asked Miss Tita if the old lady were seriously ill,
and she replied that she was only very tired--she had lived so very,
very long. That was what she said herself--she wanted to die for a
change. Besides, all her friends were dead long ago; either they ought
to have remained or she ought to have gone. That was another thing her
aunt often said--she was not at all content.

"But people don't die when they like, do they?" Miss Tita inquired. I
took the liberty of asking why, if there was actually enough money to
maintain both of them, there would not be more than enough in case of
her being left alone. She considered this difficult problem a moment
and then she said, "Oh, well, you know, she takes care of me. She thinks
that when I'm alone I shall be a great fool, I shall not know how to
manage."

"I should have supposed that you took care of her. I'm afraid she is
very proud."

"Why, have you discovered that already?" Miss Tita cried with the
glimmer of an illumination in her face.

"I was shut up with her there for a considerable time, and she struck
me, she interested me extremely. It didn't take me long to make my
discovery. She won't have much to say to me while I'm here."

"No, I don't think she will," my companion averred.

"Do you suppose she has some suspicion of me?"

Miss Tita's honest eyes gave me no sign that I had touched a mark. "I
shouldn't think so--letting you in after all so easily."

"Oh, so easily! she has covered her risk. But where is it that one could
take an advantage of her?"

"I oughtn't to tell you if I knew, ought I?" And Miss Tita added, before
I had time to reply to this, smiling dolefully, "Do you think we have
any weak points?"

"That's exactly what I'm asking. You would only have to mention them for
me to respect them religiously."

She looked at me, at this, with that air of timid but candid and even
gratified curiosity with which she had confronted me from the first; and
then she said, "There is nothing to tell. We are terribly quiet. I don't
know how the days pass. We have no life."

"I wish I might think that I should bring you a little."

"Oh, we know what we want," she went on. "It's all right."

There were various things I desired to ask her: how in the world they
did live; whether they had any friends or visitors, any relations in
America or in other countries. But I judged such an inquiry would
be premature; I must leave it to a later chance. "Well, don't YOU be
proud," I contented myself with saying. "Don't hide from me altogether."

"Oh, I must stay with my aunt," she returned, without looking at me.
And at the same moment, abruptly, without any ceremony of parting, she
quitted me and disappeared, leaving me to make my own way downstairs. I
remained a while longer, wandering about the bright desert (the sun was
pouring in) of the old house, thinking the situation over on the
spot. Not even the pattering little serva came to look after me, and I
reflected that after all this treatment showed confidence.




IV


Perhaps it did, but all the same, six weeks later, toward the middle of
June, the moment when Mrs. Prest undertook her annual migration, I had
made no measurable advance. I was obliged to confess to her that I had
no results to speak of. My first step had been unexpectedly rapid, but
there was no appearance that it would be followed by a second. I was
a thousand miles from taking tea with my hostesses--that privilege
of which, as I reminded Mrs. Prest, we both had had a vision. She
reproached me with wanting boldness, and I answered that even to be bold
you must have an opportunity: you may push on through a breach but
you can't batter down a dead wall. She answered that the breach I had
already made was big enough to admit an army and accused me of wasting
precious hours in whimpering in her salon when I ought to have been
carrying on the struggle in the field. It is true that I went to see her
very often, on the theory that it would console me (I freely expressed
my discouragement) for my want of success on my own premises. But I
began to perceive that it did not console me to be perpetually chaffed
for my scruples, especially when I was really so vigilant; and I was
rather glad when my derisive friend closed her house for the summer. She
had expected to gather amusement from the drama of my intercourse with
the Misses Bordereau, and she was disappointed that the intercourse, and
consequently the drama, had not come off. "They'll lead you on to your
ruin," she said before she left Venice. "They'll get all your money
without showing you a scrap." I think I settled down to my business with
more concentration after she had gone away.

It was a fact that up to that time I had not, save on a single brief
occasion, had even a moment's contact with my queer hostesses. The
exception had occurred when I carried them according to my promise the
terrible three thousand francs. Then I found Miss Tita waiting for me in
the hall, and she took the money from my hand so that I did not see
her aunt. The old lady had promised to receive me, but she apparently
thought nothing of breaking that vow. The money was contained in a bag
of chamois leather, of respectable dimensions, which my banker had given
me, and Miss Tita had to make a big fist to receive it. This she did
with extreme solemnity, though I tried to treat the affair a little as a
joke. It was in no jocular strain, yet it was with simplicity, that she
inquired, weighing the money in her two palms: "Don't you think it's
too much?" To which I replied that that would depend upon the amount of
pleasure I should get for it. Hereupon she turned away from me quickly,
as she had done the day before, murmuring in a tone different from any
she had used hitherto: "Oh, pleasure, pleasure--there's no pleasure in
this house!"

After this, for a long time, I never saw her, and I wondered that the
common chances of the day should not have helped us to meet. It could
only be evident that she was immensely on her guard against them; and in
addition to this the house was so big that for each other we were lost
in it. I used to look out for her hopefully as I crossed the sala in my
comings and goings, but I was not rewarded with a glimpse of the tail of
her dress. It was as if she never peeped out of her aunt's apartment. I
used to wonder what she did there week after week and year after year.
I had never encountered such a violent parti pris of seclusion; it was
more than keeping quiet--it was like hunted creatures feigning death.
The two ladies appeared to have no visitors whatever and no sort of
contact with the world. I judged at least that people could not have
come to the house and that Miss Tita could not have gone out without my
having some observation of it. I did what I disliked myself for doing
(reflecting that it was only once in a way): I questioned my servant
about their habits and let him divine that I should be interested in any
information he could pick up. But he picked up amazingly little for a
knowing Venetian: it must be added that where there is a perpetual fast
there are very few crumbs on the floor. His cleverness in other ways was
sufficient, if it was not quite all that I had attributed to him on
the occasion of my first interview with Miss Tita. He had helped my
gondolier to bring me round a boatload of furniture; and when these
articles had been carried to the top of the palace and distributed
according to our associated wisdom he organized my household with
such promptitude as was consistent with the fact that it was composed
exclusively of himself. He made me in short as comfortable as I could be
with my indifferent prospects. I should have been glad if he had fallen
in love with Miss Bordereau's maid or, failing this, had taken her
in aversion; either event might have brought about some kind of
catastrophe, and a catastrophe might have led to some parley. It was
my idea that she would have been sociable, and I myself on various
occasions saw her flit to and fro on domestic errands, so that I was
sure she was accessible. But I tasted of no gossip from that fountain,
and I afterward learned that Pasquale's affections were fixed upon an
object that made him heedless of other women. This was a young lady with
a powdered face, a yellow cotton gown, and much leisure, who used often
to come to see him. She practiced, at her convenience, the art of a
stringer of beads (these ornaments are made in Venice, in profusion; she
had her pocket full of them, and I used to find them on the floor of my
apartment), and kept an eye on the maiden in the house. It was not for
me of course to make the domestics tattle, and I never said a word to
Miss Bordereau's cook.

It seemed to me a proof of the old lady's determination to have nothing
to do with me that she should never have sent me a receipt for my three
months' rent. For some days I looked out for it and then, when I had
given it up, I wasted a good deal of time in wondering what her reason
had been for neglecting so indispensable and familiar a form. At first I
was tempted to send her a reminder, after which I relinquished the idea
(against my judgment as to what was right in the particular case), on
the general ground of wishing to keep quiet. If Miss Bordereau
suspected me of ulterior aims she would suspect me less if I should
be businesslike, and yet I consented not to be so. It was possible she
intended her omission as an impertinence, a visible irony, to show
how she could overreach people who attempted to overreach her. On that
hypothesis it was well to let her see that one did not notice her little
tricks. The real reading of the matter, I afterward perceived, was
simply the poor old woman's desire to emphasize the fact that I was in
the enjoyment of a favor as rigidly limited as it had been liberally
bestowed. She had given me part of her house, and now she would not give
me even a morsel of paper with her name on it. Let me say that even
at first this did not make me too miserable, for the whole episode was
essentially delightful to me. I foresaw that I should have a summer